[ENH] Bep 009: Positron Emission Tomography (#633)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/04-modality-specific-files/09-positron-emission-tomography.md

# Positron Emission Tomography

Support for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).
Please cite the following paper when referring to this part of the standard in
context of the academic literature:

> Knudsen GM, Ganz M, Appelhoff S, Boellaard R, Bormans G, Carson RE, Catana C, Doudet D, Gee AD, Greve DN, Gunn RN, Halldin C, Herscovitch P, Huang H, Keller SH, Lammertsma AA, Lanzenberger R, Liow JS, Lohith TG, Lubberink M, Lyoo CH, Mann JJ, Matheson GJ, Nichols TE, Nørgaard M, Ogden T, Parsey R, Pike VW, Price J, Rizzo G, Rosa-Neto P, Schain M, Scott PJH, Searle G, Slifstein M, Suhara T, Talbot PS, Thomas A, Veronese M, Wong DF, Yaqub M, Zanderigo F, Zoghbi S, Innis RB. Guidelines for Content and Format of PET Brain Data in Publications and in Archives: A Consensus Paper. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 2020 Aug;40(8):1576-1585. 
> doi: [10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433)

The following example PET datasets have been formatted using this specification
and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

> -   Single dynamic scan (pet, mri, blood): [`pet_example1`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/dmjmaxfswatptpm/AACw31cTyChLA1kwM4Vhqueja?dl=0)

Reviewer: I suspect that in the long term we will want to put those examples in a more permanent place than dropbox. :wink:

Author: @Remi-Gau, yes, of course, but me and @mnoergaard  wanted to fix this last in case we need to keep updating the examples. Is that ok?

Reviewer: Of course it is. :-)

-   Single dynamic scan (pet, mri): [`pet_example2`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i95a71rpq2unks7/AACby5XcYQp9vcwgx3cNXBhza?dl=0)
-   Single dynamic scan (pet, blood): [`pet_example3`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i0c3iq50id4s0d3/AABSjaczHM1SQnMRvh3fc7fna?dl=0)

Further PET datasets are available from [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org).

## PET recording data

> As specified above, this extension is relevant for brain PET imaging and its associated data, such as blood data. In addition, the extension is in accordance with the guidelines for reporting and sharing brain PET data (Knudsen et al. 2020, [1]). If you want to share structural magnetic resonance (MR) images with your PET data, please distribute them according to the original BIDS specification (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable). Please pay specific attention to the format the MR images are in, such as if they have been unwarped in order to correct for gradient non-linearities. There is a specific field in the MRI BIDS (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html) called “NonlinearGradientCorrection” which indicates this. The reason for this is that the MRI needs to be corrected for nonlinear gradients in order to fit the accompanying PET scans for co-registration [1, 2]. In general, SI units must be used (we refer to https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/05-units.html) and we recommend to use the CMIXF style formatting for SI units e.g. "kBq/mL" rather than "kilobecquerel per ml". An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1, defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined “time zero” (which should be defined either to be scan start or injection time; please note an exception to this definition is possible if a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As specified above, this extension is relevant for brain PET imaging and its associated data, such as blood data. In addition, the extension is in accordance with the guidelines for reporting and sharing brain PET data (Knudsen et al. 2020, [1]). If you want to share structural magnetic resonance (MR) images with your PET data, please distribute them according to the original BIDS specification (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable). Please pay specific attention to the format the MR images are in, such as if they have been unwarped in order to correct for gradient non-linearities. There is a specific field in the MRI BIDS (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html) called “NonlinearGradientCorrection” which indicates this. The reason for this is that the MRI needs to be corrected for nonlinear gradients in order to fit the accompanying PET scans for co-registration [1, 2]. In general, SI units must be used (we refer to https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/05-units.html) and we recommend to use the CMIXF style formatting for SI units, for example, "kBq/mL" rather than "kilobecquerel per ml". An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1, defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined “time zero” (which should be defined either to be scan start or injection time; please note an exception to this definition is possible if a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed).
```

We are in the process of removing latin expression from the specs. So you might want to do a quick search for `e.g.`, `i.e`, `etc`.

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

> Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements, and defined on a common time scale. Note, “time zero”can either be defined as time of injection or scan start, and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point. Furthermore, although in this example tracer injection coincides with scan start, this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements, and defined on a common time scale. Note, “time zero” can either be defined as time of injection or scan start, and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point. Furthermore, although in this example tracer injection coincides with scan start, this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”. 
```
missing space

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_blood.json
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.tsv

> 	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.json

Reviewer 2: These do not appear to have a suffix.

Author: Hi @tsalo, so we were not sure if the .tsv files and accompanying .json files should have a suffix. This we had discussed a bit with @robertoostenveld. We want to be able to check the .tsv and .json files in the validator and otherwise our naming would conflict with the _blood.json file which ahs all the required meta information about blood.

Author: Hi @tsalo, did my answer above make sense?

Reviewer 2: I'm so sorry for not responding to this! From what I understand, a suffix is an absolutely essential part of BIDS filenames, so I think we need to find a solution where all files have suffixes. That said, I need to re-read the BEP in a bit more detail before I can come up with any ideas.

Author: This has been resolved with the maintainers.

| :---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ColumnName    | REQUIRED. Name of the column (e.g. "plasma_radioactivity".                                                                        |
| Description | REQUIRED. Radioactivity in plasma.                                                                                      |
| Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of plasma radioactivity (e.g. "kBq/mL") |   

### Metabolites
This section may be omitted if metabolite measurements were not made. If metabolite measurements are available they should be added to the *recording-blood_discrete.tsv and the values below should be added to the *recording-blood_discrete.json.
Hence, it may contain information regarding metabolite info, such as the following three column examples:

| Field name  | Definition                                                                                                      |
| :---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | ColumnName    | REQUIRED. Name of the column (e.g. "metabolite_parent_fraction".                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: Please replace instances of "e.g." with "for example" (see #626).

| Description | REQUIRED. Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1).                                                                                      |

> | Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of parent fraction (e.g. "unitless") |  

Reviewer 2: Please replace "unitless" with "arbitrary" (see #606).

Author: Thanks @tsalo, we are changing this.

# Positron Emission Tomography

Support for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) was developed as a
[BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../01-introduction.md#citing-bids)
on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.

> Several [example PET datasets](https://https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples) have been formatted using this specification

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Several [example PET datasets](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples) have been formatted using this specification
```

    these scans may be grouped into the same session.
    In other datasets, a subject leaving the scanner and returning under the same
    injection may be considered separate sessions.

1.  **Run** - In PET, subjects may have to leave the scanner to use the bathroom.
    While leaving the scanner would interrupt an MR acquisition, in PET this
    disruption is more appropriately considered missing data during a run.

1.  **Time zero** - A reference point in time, to which all timestamps pertaining
    to a recording are relative.
    Time zero will most commonly be the time of injection of a radioisotope, or
    the time at which the first scan of an acquisition is begun.
    If a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed,
    another time zero may be more convenient.

An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined "time zero".

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.

> Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start, but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan, this timepoint may also be chosen as time zero. The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero, but because the time of injection not always coincides with scan start, the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection. If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section (`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime`). In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start.
> and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.

Reviewer 4: Mostly formatting, with "not always coincides" -> "does not always coincide". The second line appears to be a fragment from a previous version, so I removed it.

```suggestion
Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start,
but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan,
this time point may also be chosen as time zero.
The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero,
but because the time of injection does not always coincide with scan start,
the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection.
If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section
(`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime`).
In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start.
```

Reviewer 5: Thanks, @effigies !

In this example, tracer injection coincides with scan start.

## PET recording data

{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(datatypes=["pet"], suffixes=["pet", "events"]) }}

PET data MUST be stored in the `pet` directory.
PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D (or 3D, if only one volume was acquired)
NIfTI files with the `_pet` suffix.
Volumes MUST be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

The OPTIONAL [`task-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#task) is used to
indicate a task subjects were asked to perform in the scanner.

> Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions. For task based PET a corresponding [`task events`](./05-task-events.md) file MUST be provided (please note that this file is not necessary for resting scans).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions.
For task based PET, a corresponding [`task events`](./05-task-events.md) file MUST be provided
(please note that this file is not necessary for resting scans).
```

| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `time`                       | REQUIRED                                                    | Time in relation to `TimeZero` defined by the `*_pet.json`. (for example, 5)      | Seconds                                                                             |
| `plasma_radioactivity`       | REQUIRED if `PlasmaAvail` is `true`                         | Radioactivity in plasma                                                           | Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, `"kBq/mL"`)                              |
| `metabolite_parent_fraction` | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                     | Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                          | Unit of parent fraction (for example, `"unitless"`)                                 |

> | `metabolite_polar_fraction`  | RECOMMENDED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                  | Polar metabolite fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                | Unit of polar metabolite fraction (for example, `"unitless"`)                       |

Reviewer 6: Above MetaboliteAvail says metabolite_polar_fraction is required if true, but metabolite_polar_fraction is lsited as recommended here.

| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, for example, `"Bq/mL"`).                                      |
| RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, for example, `"Bq/mL"`).                                      |
| SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, for example, `"Bq/mL"`).                                     |

All reconstruction-specific parameters that are not specified, but one wants to include, should go into the `ReconMethodParameterValues` field.

#### Example (`*_pet.json`)

```JSON
{
  "Manufacturer": "Siemens",
  "ManufacturersModelName": "High-Resolution Research Tomograph (HRRT, CTI/Siemens)",
  "BodyPart": "Brain",
  "Unit": "Bq/mL",
  "TracerName": "CIMBI-36",
  "TracerRadionuclide": "C11",
  "TracerMolecularWeight": 380.28,
  "TracerMolecularWeightUnit": "g/mol",

> 

Reviewer 3: removing a blank line from the example
```suggestion
```

| `hplc_recovery_fractions`    | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteRecoveryCorrectionApplied` is `true` | HPLC recovery fractions (the fraction of activity that gets loaded onto the HPLC) | Unit of recovery fractions (for example, `"unitless"`)                              |
| `whole_blood_radioactivity`  | REQUIRED if `WholeBloodAvail` is `true`                     | Radioactivity in whole blood samples                                              | Unit of radioactivity measurements in whole blood samples (for example, `"kBq/mL"`) |

As with all [tabular files](../02-common-principles.md#tabular-files),
additional columns MAY be defined in `_blood.json`.
For clarity, it is RECOMMENDED to include the above column definitions in `_blood.json`,
as shown in the following example.

### Example blood data

**`*_recording-manual_blood.json`**:

```JSON
{
    "PlasmaAvail": true,
    "WholeBloodAvail": true,
    "MetaboliteAvail": true,
    "MetaboliteMethod": "",
    "MetaboliteRecoveryCorrectionApplied": false,
    "DispersionCorrected": false,

> 

Reviewer 3: removing a blank line

```suggestion
```

An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined "time zero".

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.
Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start, but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan, this timepoint may also be chosen as time zero. The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero, but because the time of injection not always coincides with scan start, the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection. If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section (`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime´). In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start. 
and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.
In this example, tracer injection coincides with scan start.

## PET recording data

Template:

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    pet/

>         sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.nii[.gz]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_trc-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.nii[.gz]
```

        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json
```

PET data MUST be stored in the `pet` directory.
PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D (or 3D, if only one volume was acquired)
NIfTI files with the `_pet` suffix.
Volumes MUST be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

The OPTIONAL [`task-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#task) is used to
indicate a task subjects were asked to perform in the scanner.
Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions.

> The [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) entity is used to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The [`trc-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#trc) entity is used to
```

>         sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_trc-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json
```

indicate the tracer used.
This entity is OPTIONAL if only one tracer is used in the study,
but REQUIRED to distinguish between tracers if multiple are used.
The label used is arbitrary and each file requires a separate JSON sidecar
with details of the tracer used (see below).

> Examples are `acq-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose or `acq-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Examples are `trc-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose or `trc-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B.
```

    these scans may be grouped into the same session.
    In other datasets, a subject leaving the scanner and returning under the same
    injection may be considered separate sessions.

1.  **Run** - In PET, subjects may have to leave the scanner to use the bathroom.
    While leaving the scanner would interrupt an MR acquisition, in PET this
    disruption is more appropriately considered missing data during a run.

1.  **Time zero** - A reference point in time, to which all timestamps pertaining
    to a recording are relative.
    Time zero will most commonly be the time of injection of a radioisotope, or
    the time at which the first scan of an acquisition is begun.
    If a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed,
    another time zero may be more convenient.

An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined "time zero".

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.

> Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start, but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan, this timepoint may also be chosen as time zero. The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero, but because the time of injection not always coincides with scan start, the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection. If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section (`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime´). In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start, but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan, this timepoint may also be chosen as time zero. The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero, but because the time of injection not always coincides with scan start, the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection. If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section (`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime`). In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start. 
```

this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying
either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”.

PET data belong to the `pet` directory. PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D
(or 3D if only one volume was acquired) NIfTI files with `_pet` suffix.

> Volumes should be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

Reviewer 7: Shouldn't we prefer `Volumes MUST be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).` 
If we use `Volumes SHOULD be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).`  How do we ensure the ordering --> "FrameTimesStart" in the json file I guess ; does the validator issue a warning making the user aware the order is not chronological?

Author: I agree with that change in stating that they MUST be in chronological order. I can't think of a PET example where this isn't the case.  We'll follow up on the validator if this actually doing it. Maybe @rwblair can comment?

| TracerRadionuclide            | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Radioisotope labelling tracer (for example, `"C11"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). For bolus-infusion experiments, this value should be the sum of all injected radioactivity originating from both bolus and infusion. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                                                  |
| InjectedRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the specified injected radioactivity (for example, `"MBq"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **For those tracers in which injected mass is not available (for example FDG) can be set to "n/a"** |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **For those tracers in which injected mass is not available (for example FDG) can be set to `"n/a"`** |
```

> | InjectedMassUnit              | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the mass of compound injected (for example, "ug" or "umol"). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to "-1"**.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedMassUnit              | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the mass of compound injected (for example, `"ug"` or `"umol"`). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to `"n/a"`**.                                                                                    |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Specific activity of compound injected. **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to -1**.                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Specific activity of compound injected. **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to `"n/a"`**.                                                                                                                          |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of specified specific radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g"). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to "-1"**.                                                                                         |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of specified specific radioactivity (for example, `"Bq/g"`). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and SHOULD be set to `"n/a"`****.                                                                                         |
```

> | ModeOfAdministration          | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Mode of administration of the injection (for example, "bolus" or "infusion").                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| ModeOfAdministration          | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Mode of administration of the injection (for example, `"bolus"` or `"infusion"`).                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

| TracerMolecularWeight         | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Accurate molecular weight of the tracer used.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| TracerMolecularWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the molecular weights measurement (for example, `"g/mol"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| InjectedMassPerWeight         | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Injected mass per kilogram bodyweight.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | InjectedMassPerWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit format of the injected mass per kilogram bodyweight (for example, "ug/kg").                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedMassPerWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit format of the injected mass per kilogram bodyweight (for example, `"ug/kg"`).                                                                                                                                                                                           |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivityMeasTime | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which specific radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivityMeasTime | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which specific radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit `"hh:mm:ss"`.                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                                           |

> | MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, `"Bq/g"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
```

> | MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, `"Bq/g"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, `"GBq/umol"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
```

> | MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit `"hh:mm:ss"`.                                                                                                                                                                                |
```

| InjectedMassPerWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED | [string][] | Unit format of the injected mass per kilogram bodyweight (for example, "ug/kg").                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| SpecificRadioactivityMeasTime | RECOMMENDED | [string][] | Time to which specific radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                                          |
| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED | [number][] | Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                                        |

> | MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED | [string][] | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED | [string][] | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "GBq/umol").                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
```

Bq/g is specific activity. I've changed it to GBq/umol . This matches the example JSON data later down the page. However, from the chemistry consensus paper, they state that GBq/umol or Bq/mol can both be used (and they're both equivalent: same number). Would Bq/mol not be preferable (in both the example and the table) as it involves no multiple prefixes?

Reviewer 5: First, thanks a lot for your comments, @mathesong. You are absolutely right. This should be Bq/mol.

Reviewer 8: Actually, thinking this through again, wouldn't GBq/umol be a factor of 1000 greater than Bq/mol..?

The chemistry consensus paper puts it like this as if they are equivalent:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7190884/104717561-c9738980-5729-11eb-87af-703404dbe1f1.png)

and the guidelines paper puts it like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7190884/104717872-4a328580-572a-11eb-8d8e-005b2ffebae1.png)

I read this initially as their being eqivalent, but, maybe I'm being stupid, but isn't this 10^9 Bq / 10^-6 mol .  Or I guess it's probably that it's just fine to report in either Bq/mol or GBq/umol, even though they're different values.  But in this case, probably best to stick with GBq/umol (though not Bq/g as it was before) in the example to match the first suggestion in both papers.

Reviewer 9: I am confused. Would it not be 

```
    GBq       10^6 Bq                 Bq
1 * ---- =  ------------ = 10^12  *  ----
    umol      10^-6 mol               mol
```
?

Reviewer 8: Haha - now we're all confused :).  Worse, I think we're all wrong actually.

G = giga = 10^9, --> 1 Bq = 10^-9 GBq     (10^6 would be mega, M)
u = micro = 10^-6, --> 1 mol = 10^6 umol

so:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7190884/104729067-29712c80-5738-11eb-8caf-ef02699f02a2.png)

Sorry for all the confusion!

Author: Dear @mathesong, I think we should stick with Bq/mol and this is as we saw above not equivalent to Gbq/umol. But then people are not confused if we just force everyone to convert it to Bq/mol.

Reviewer 8: I just came back from a little break, and I read through the above again, and I hang my head in shame once more to have to report that I seem to have got it wrong once again.  I even have an (old, and mostly unused) undergrad degree in applied chemistry to my name, so this is doubly embarrassing 😬😂 - but I'll blame it on its still being January. @robertoostenveld was closest though :)

Here's what it should be:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7190884/105489705-f7ba1180-5cb3-11eb-885e-1c4e1af28097.png)

As such, I think I now understand why both were presented: Bq/mol is the basic SI unit, but it's a very, very large number and it's probably highly prone to error when having to count out all those zeros.  I think forcing everyone to use GBq/umol is probably preferable, despite the multipliers.

Reviewer 5: I agree with Granville. Also on the math
![Blank diagram (1)](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12412821/105519732-13381300-5cda-11eb-86e4-8a3c1eb236fb.png)

> | InfusionSpeedUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of infusion speed (for example, "mL/s").                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InfusionSpeedUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of infusion speed (for example, `"mL/s"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

> | InjectedVolume            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Injected volume of the radiotracer in the unit ´mL´.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 3: code formatting must be done in backticks: ` not with "forwardticks" like here: ´

`like so`

´not like this´

```suggestion
| InjectedVolume            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Injected volume of the radiotracer in the unit `mL`.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
```

Reviewer 5: I was just going through it and changing - you are simply too fast and efficient, @sappelhoff ! :-)

> | InjectedVolume            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Injected volume of the radiotracer in the unit ´mL´.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedVolume            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Injected volume of the radiotracer in the unit `"mL"`.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
```

| -------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| TimeZero        | REQUIRED | [string][] | Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |
| ScanStart       | REQUIRED | [number][] | Time of start of scan with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                             |

> | InjectionStart  | REQUIRED | [number][] | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `timeZero`. |

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
| InjectionStart  | REQUIRED | [number][] | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `TimeZero`. |
```

Modified to `TimeZero` to match the other instances

Author: @mnoergaard  and I agree with that change.

Author: @sappelhoff and @effigies can you please help here, how can we deal with these changes that are outdated?

Reviewer 4: If it's outdated, you'll just need to apply them manually.

| InjectionEnd    | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]               | Time of end of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                          |

> We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units)).
```

| ReconMethodName                      | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Reconstruction method or algorithm (for example, `"3d-op-osem"`).                                               |
| ReconMethodParameterLabels           | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [strings][]               | Names of reconstruction parameters (for example, `["subsets", "iterations"]`)                                   |
| ReconMethodParameterUnit             | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [strings][]               | Unit of reconstruction parameters (for example, `["none", "none"]`).                                            |
| ReconMethodParameterValues           | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Values of reconstruction parameters (for example, `[21, 3]`)                                                    |
| ReconFilterType                      | REQUIRED              | [string][] or [array][] of [strings][] | Type of post-recon smoothing (for example, `["Shepp"]`)                                                         |

> | ReconFilterSize                      | REQUIRED              | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Kernel size of post-recon filter (FWHM) in default units `mm`.                                                                        |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| ReconFilterSize                      | REQUIRED              | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Kernel size of post-recon filter (FWHM) in default units `"mm"`.                                                                        |
```

| ReconMethodImplementationVersion     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Identification for the software used, such as name and version.                                                 |
| AttenuationCorrectionMethodReference | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Reference paper for the attenuation correction method used.                                                     |
| ScaleFactor                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scale factor for each frame.                                                                                    |
| ScatterFraction                      | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scatter fraction for each frame (Units: 0-100%).                                                                                |
| DecayCorrectionFactor                | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Decay correction factor for each frame.                                                                         |

> | PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |
```

> | PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |
> | RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: same as above: using backticks ` is required, not forward ticks ´

```suggestion
| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |
| RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                     |
```

> | SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame (same units as `Unit`, e.g. `"Bq/mL"`).                                                                                    |
```

	"ImageDecayCorrected": true,
	"ImageDecayCorrectionTime": 0,
	"ReconMethodName": "3D-OSEM-PSF",
	"ReconMethodParameterLabels": ["subsets","iterations"],
	"ReconMethodParameterUnit": ["none","none"],
	"ReconMethodParameterValues": [16,10],
	"ReconFilterType": "none",
	"AttenuationCorrection": "[137Cs]transmission scan-based"
}
```

## Blood recording data

This section includes all data needed to perform blood analysis for PET data.
The section may be omitted completely if blood measurements of radioactivity were not made.

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.tsv
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.json

```

Blood data belongs in the /pet folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder
if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.

> The blood data is most often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The blood data is often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,
```

I think it's more often than not recorded without an autosampler. This is clear for both.

Reviewer 5: I agree with your suggested change.

Author: I agree as well.

ses-02 59
```

## Blood recording data

Template:

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    pet/

> 	sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_blood.tsv

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
	sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_trc-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_blood.tsv
```

> 	sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_blood.json

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
	sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_trc-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_blood.json
```

| PlasmaAvail         | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean that specifies if plasma measurements are available.                                                                                                                                                  |
| MetaboliteAvail     | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean that specifies if metabolite measurements are available. If `true`, the `metabolite parent_fraction` and `metabolite_polar_fraction` columns MUST be present in the corresponding `*_blood.tsv` file. |
| WholeBloodAvail     | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean that specifies if whole blood measurements are available. If `true`, the `whole_blood_radioactivity` column MUST be present in the corresponding `*_blood.tsv` file.                                  |
| DispersionCorrected | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean flag specifying whether the blood data have been dispersion-corrected. NOTE: not customary for manual samples, and hence should be set to false.                                                      |

> | WithdrawalRate      | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | The rate at which the blood was withdrawn from the subject. The unit of the specified withdrawal rate should be in mL/s.                                                                                      |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| WithdrawalRate      | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | The rate at which the blood was withdrawn from the subject. The unit of the specified withdrawal rate should be in `"mL/s"`.                                                                                      |
```

| TubingType          | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Description of the type of tubing used, ideally including the material and (internal) diameter.                                                                                                               |
| TubingLength        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | The length of the blood tubing, from the subject to the detector in meters.                                                                                                                                   |
| DispersionConstant  | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | External dispersion time constant resulting from tubing in default unit seconds.                                                                                                                              |
| Haematocrit         | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured haematocrit, meaning the volume of erythrocytes divided by the volume of whole blood.                                                                                                                |

> | BloodDensity        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured blood density. Unit of blood density should be in g/mL.                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| BloodDensity        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured blood density. Unit of blood density should be in `"g/mL"`.                                                                                                                                              |
```

### Radioactivity in plasma

This section may be omitted if plasma measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled plasma data.
If plasma measurements are available by manual sampling, they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.

> If plasma measurements are available by an autosampler, they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`

Reviewer 8: I don't think there exist autosamplers which can measure plasma. This might be confusing.

Reviewer 5: You are right, it is not the autosampler that measures plasma data. But there are cases where data from automated samples (whole blood) are centrifuged to collect plasma samples. See Parsey et al. 2006, JNM, metabolite consideration. These should go into recording-autosampler_blood.<extension>. 

Maybe the sentence could be updated to: "If plasma measurements are derived from continuous blood samples from an autosampler, they ...."? 

Similar answer to the comment below. Let me know what you (or others) think.

Reviewer 8: Well, I stand corrected!  I've not seen this before - thanks for correcting me!  I thought that the small amounts of blood sampled by automatic sampling systems were too small for separating out the plasma and quantifying radioactivity. Though notable that they did do the metabolite analysis using the manual samples only.

I think the original wording is probably better then in this case, rather than "derived from continuous blood samples". If I remember correctly, at KI for manual samples at early time points, they would be collected from the blood efflux from the automatic sampler (over several seconds). So the time point would be slightly more dispersed than if it were sampled directly, but I this would still constitute a manual sample as it would be a much larger volume than the auto samples, and would be measured separately in the same gamma counter as the remainder of the manual samples.  So "derived from continuous blood samples" could be confusing in this context.

Author: So @mathesong, we agree to keep the wording then?

Reviewer 8: Agree!

and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| **Column name** | **Description** | **Units**                                      |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | 
| plasma_radioactivity | Radioactivity in plasma | Unit of parent fraction (for example, "unitless") |       |

### Metabolites

This section may be omitted if metabolite measurements were not made.
If metabolite measurements are available by manual sampling
they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.

> If metabolite measurements are available by an autosampler they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`

Reviewer 8: I don't think there exist autosamplers which can measure parent fraction. This might be confusing.

Author: @mathesong please see discussion above, we keep the wording, agreed?

Reviewer 8: Agree that we keep the original wording! :+1:

> | `plasma_radioactivity`       | REQUIRED if `PlasmaAvail` is `true`                         | Radioactivity in plasma                                                           | Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, "kBq/mL")                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `plasma_radioactivity`       | REQUIRED if `PlasmaAvail` is `true`                         | Radioactivity in plasma                                                           | Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, `"kBq/mL"`)                              |
```

> | `metabolite_parent_fraction` | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                     | Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                          | Unit of parent fraction (for example, "unitless")                                 |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `metabolite_parent_fraction` | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                     | Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                          | Unit of parent fraction (for example, `"unitless"`)                                 |
```

> | `metabolite_polar_fraction`  | RECOMMENDED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                  | Polar metabolite fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                | Unit of polar metabolite fraction (for example, "unitless")                       |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `metabolite_polar_fraction`  | RECOMMENDED if `MetaboliteAvail` is `true`                  | Polar metabolite fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                | Unit of polar metabolite fraction (for example, `"unitless"`)                       |
```

> | `hplc_recovery_fractions`    | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteRecoveryCorrectionApplied` is `true` | HPLC recovery fractions (the fraction of activity that gets loaded onto the HPLC) | Unit of recovery fractions (for example, "unitless")                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `hplc_recovery_fractions`    | REQUIRED if `MetaboliteRecoveryCorrectionApplied` is `true` | HPLC recovery fractions (the fraction of activity that gets loaded onto the HPLC) | Unit of recovery fractions (for example, `"unitless"`)                              |
```

> | `whole_blood_radioactivity`  | REQUIRED if `WholeBloodAvail` is `true`                     | Radioactivity in whole blood samples                                              | Unit of radioactivity measurements in whole blood samples (for example, "kBq/mL") |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `whole_blood_radioactivity`  | REQUIRED if `WholeBloodAvail` is `true`                     | Radioactivity in whole blood samples                                              | Unit of radioactivity measurements in whole blood samples (for example, `"kBq/mL"`) |
```

If a `ses-<label>` subfolder is included as part of the directory hierarchy,
then the same `ses-<label>` tag must also be included as part of the file names themselves.
In general, we assume that a new session with respect to PET starts with either a new injection
(probably most common case) or with the subject being taken out of the scanner
(same injection, but subject leaves the scanner and returns).
However, for example, if a subject has to leave the scanner room and
then be re-positioned on the scanner bed, for example, to use the bathroom,
the set of PET acquisitions will still be considered as a session and match
sessions acquired in other subjects.
Similarly, in situations where different data types are obtained over several
visits (for example, FDG PET on one day followed by amyloid PET a couple days after)
those can be grouped in one session.
Please see the difference with the `run-<label>` below.

**Task:** With respect to the `task-<label>`, data is arranged in a similar way as task-based
and resting state BOLD fMRI data.
In case of studies using combined PET/fMRI, subject-specific tasks may be carried out
during the acquisition within the same session.

> Therefore, it is possible to specify `task-<label>` in accordance with the fMRI data.

Reviewer 9: it is not totally clear to me from this whether `task-<label>` is always required, with `resting` or `rest` in case there is no explicit task, or whether it can be left out (as with an anatomical MRI).

Reviewer 5: It should be left out if there is no explicit task. Where in the MRI specification is this stated?

Author: So the setting we are thinking of is if you have an acquisition in the PET MRI, there might be a task measurement you want to associated the PET data with. But if you don't have a PET/MR or you use the machine like you would use a separate MRI and PET, then this is not necessary, therefore we wrote "it is possible". But the label is not always required. So this should be as with anatomical MRI. Should we then rephrase the wording or refer to anatomical MRI?

Reviewer 9: in case you do a functional PET scan, e.g. with H2O15, but not using a PET/MR system, you would also want `task-<label>`, right? I don't see how it depends on hardware peculiarities (the PET camera being combined with an MR system), to me it seems that its presence is required as soon as the PET data is to be interpreted similar to an MRI `func`, but not if the data is to be interpreted as `anat`.

| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                      |
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                           |

> | InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 9: in what units is this number specified?

Author: Hmm, here we seem to have a GitHub bug. @mnoergaard  has the InfusionSpeed in his branch, but it's missing here. We'll try and figure out what went wrong here.

| InjectedVolumeUnit            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the injected volume of the radiotracer (for example, "mL").                                                                                                                                                                                   |

> | Purity                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Purity of the radiolabeled compound (for example, 90).                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 9: In what units is this number specified? The example suggests that it is percent, but it is not explicit.

#### Time

This section is mandatory and contains timing information about the imaging experiment. We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization ([LINK](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html)).

| **Key name**    | **Requirement level** | **Data type**            | **Description**                                                                                                                                                           |
| --------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer 9: TimeZero, ScanStart, InjectionStart have some redundancy. Since if TimeZero="ScanStart", then ScanStart=0.

I suggest to make ScanStart and InjectionStart conditional on the value of TimeZero, i.e. if TimeZero="ScanStart", then InjectionStart MUST be specified and ScanStart not (and vice versa).

Author: So in principle, TimeZero could also be neither of them, but e.g. the time a pharmacological challenge is given, e.g. Ketamin. So there is a totally separate option for TimeZero as well, since PET experiments can be really complicated. So that's why we haven't required this.

| ScanStart       | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of scan with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                             |
| InjectionStart  | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `timeZero`. |
| FrameTimesStart | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Start times for all frames relative to `TimeZero` in default unit seconds.                                                                                                |
| FrameDuration   | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Time duration of each frame in default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1242) converted to seconds.                                                      |

> | ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]               | Date of scan in the default unit “yyyy:mm:dd”.                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 9: for all other modalities this is to be stored in the scans.tsv file, see [here](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/bep-009/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#scans-file).

Please keep it consistent. This information is already hard enough as it is w.r.t. possible deidentification and date shifts.

Reviewer 9: hmm, I was not totally correct here: the `acq_time` in scans.tsv is a "datetime", not only a "date". Still, I would prefer to see the date of acquisition for PET in the same place as for MRI.

Author: So just to be clear, there should be a new file scans.tsv and the only thing in there should be datetime since the MR spec doesn't have it?

Reviewer: Well this technically is not an MR file.

But pretty much a modality agnostic file that can also be useful to know which modality was acquired when with respect to the others.

The current status of scans.tsv files is optional, but your table seems to make them recommended.

Not sure we can / want to have different levels of "requirements" for files like this depending on the modality within the dataset.

https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#scans-file

Author: Hmm, should we have a discussion with the maintainers regarding this? @Remi-Gau @effigies @tsalo @sappelhoff

	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.json

```

Blood data belongs in the /pet folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder
if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.
The blood data is most often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,
or manually for discrete blood samples.
Therefore, the recording key (`recording-<label>`) has two reserved values:
`autosampler`,
for continuous blood data measurements;
and `manual`, for discrete blood data.
All blood measurements should be reported according to a single time-scale
in relation to time zero defined by the PET data (Figure 1).
All definitions used below are in accordance with Innis et al. 2007 ([doi:10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493)).

## Blood sidecar JSON (`*recording-(manual|autosampler)_blood.json`)

> If blood measurements were made a `*recording-<label>_blood.json` file is expected that contains

Reviewer 9: I suggest to format `*recording-<label>_blood.json` as `*_recording-<label>_blood.json`, i.e. with an underscore in between the wildcard and the key-value pair, or as `_recording-<label>_blood.json` without the wildcard. This would have to be done consistently throughout the chapter. You may want to check how these references to files are formatted elsewhere.

Author: Agreed!

information about which blood data (plasma, whole blood, and metabolites) is available as well as some blood measurement details.

> These are detailed in the next sections. Different fields are customary depending on if manual or automatic blood sampling is carried out.

Reviewer 9: I recommend that for the json (which accompanies the tsv), a link is made to the general section https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/bep-009/02-common-principles.html#tabular-files    

That also specifies how columns in the TSV file are to be documented in the JSON file. 

Another example of that is https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/bep-009/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#phenotypic-and-assessment-data. I wonder whether the JSON fields here should also be represented under `MeasurementToolMetadata` for consistency, or whether they are to be represented at the top level.

| **Key name**                        | **Requirement level** | **Data type** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| ----------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| PlasmaAvail                         | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean that specifies if plasma measurements are available. If this is false, all of the plasma fields should be excluded.                                                                                                                                   |

> | PlasmaFreeFraction                  | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured free fraction in plasma, meaning the concentration of free compound in plasma divided by total concentration of compound in plasma.                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 9: what are the units? Is it expressed as a fraction, like 0.10, or as a percentage like 10% (which would numerically be 10.0)?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PlasmaFreeFraction                  | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured free fraction in plasma, meaning the concentration of free compound in plasma divided by total concentration of compound in plasma (Units: 0-100%).                                                                                                                  |
```

| DispersionCorrected                 | REQUIRED              | [boolean][]   | Boolean flag specifying whether the blood data have been dispersion-corrected. NOTE: not customary for manual samples, and hence should be set to false.                                                                                                      |
| WithdrawalRate                      | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | The rate at which the blood was withdrawn from the subject. The unit of the specified withdrawal rate should be in mL/s.                                                                                                                                      |
| TubingType                          | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Description of the type of tubing used, ideally including the material and (internal) diameter.                                                                                                                                                               |

> | TubingLength                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | The length of the blood tubing, from the subject to the detector in the default unit centimeter.                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 9: I notice "the default unit centimeter". Nowhere else in the spec is the default cm. It is either mm or m (according to SI).

I don't mind if it is expressed in cm, but I would then rather write "The length of the blood tubing, from the subject to the detector _in centimeters_" and not suggest that cm is in general a default.

Reviewer 9: elsewhere it says "default unit seconds", which I do not object against, since seconds is also the default elsewhere (e.g. in MRI, EEG, etc.)

| BloodDensity                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured blood density. Unit of blood density should be in g/mL.                                                                                                                                                                                              |

### Time

If manual blood samples, for example, using a COBRA counter are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*recording-manual_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-manual_blood.json`.
If blood samples using an autosampler, for example, using an Allogg autosampler are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-autosampler_blood.json`.

| **Column name** | **Description**                                                              | **Units**                             |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |

> | time            | Time in relation to `TimeZero` defined by the `*_pet.json`. (for example, 5) | Unit of time steps (for example, "s") |

Reviewer 9: At the top of the PET specification it states "In general, SI units must be used "

So this must be in units of seconds, right? Not "for example in seconds". Imagine someone would specify the values in the table in minutes, would it then still be correctly interpretable?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| time            | Time in relation to `TimeZero` defined by the `*_pet.json`. (for example, 5) | Unit of time steps in seconds |
```

Author: Agreed, we made the wording more specific here.

### Radioactivity in plasma

This section may be omitted if plasma measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled plasma data.
If plasma measurements are available by manual sampling, they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.
If plasma measurements are available by an autosampler, they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| **Column name**      | **Description**         | **Units**                                         |
| -------------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |

> | plasma_radioactivity | Radioactivity in plasma | Unit of parent fraction (for example, "unitless") |

Reviewer 9: it is unclear to me how I would figure out the units of the numbers that are given in this table. The table would for example look like this 

```
plasma_radioactivity
32.4
54.3
21.3
13.4
1.2
...
```

which field in which JSON explains what these numbers mean?

Reviewer 5: The units are given in the corresponding *.json file. https://github.com/mnoergaard/bids-specification/blob/bep-009/src/04-modality-specific-files/09-positron-emission-tomography.md#example-_recording-manual_bloodjson

Author: Thanks for catching this, there was actually a wrong statement under unit. @mnoergaard has fixed it.

Author: Thanks for catching this, there was actually a wrong statement under unit. @mnoergaard has fixed it.

context of the academic literature.

The following example PET datasets have been formatted using this specification
and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri, blood):
    [`pet_example1`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/1wpmmilq18mjquq/AABmA1o4vZMmBuGK1Io3vwf3a?dl=0)

-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri):
    [`pet_example2`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/33adqfaq3kkn58z/AADF5ZbMp6YOs2lOZgnLxZpaa?dl=0)

-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, blood):
    [`pet_example3`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/6egwsy442caribr/AABw6GrfvBQClbgie5Gaa6WLa?dl=0)

Further PET datasets are available from [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org).

## Terminology and conventions

PET-BIDS is fully consistent with the BIDS specification as a whole.
However, BIDS was initially developed in the context of MRI,
so some terminology may be unfamiliar to researchers from each field.
This section adds clarifications to
[Common Principles - Definitions](../02-common-principles.md#definitions)
for the PET context, and introduces the term "time zero" which is currently
specific to PET.

> 1.  **Session** - In most cases, a new session with respect to PET corresponds

Reviewer 5: From Mattia Veronese: Would it be possible to give some examples of different types of session as done for fMRI in https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/bep-009/06-longitudinal-and-multi-site-studies.html  to show what to do in case of break, multiple tracer at baseline?

Author: We are in the process of making more examples and will share them under the bids-examples.

Author: The additonal examples have been shared as of now on Dropbox and will be added to the above after they are moved to the bids-examples repo.

    In situations where different data types are obtained over several visits
    (for example, FDG PET on one day followed by amyloid PET a couple days after)
    these scans may be grouped into the same session.
    In other datasets, a subject leaving the scanner and returning under the same
    injection may be considered separate sessions.

1.  **Run** - In PET, subjects may have to leave the scanner to use the bathroom.
    While leaving the scanner would interrupt an MR acquisition, in PET this
    disruption is more appropriately considered missing data during a run.

1.  **Time zero** - A reference point in time, to which all timestamps pertaining
    to a recording are relative.
    Time zero will most commonly be the time of injection of a radioisotope, or
    the time at which the first scan of an acquisition is begun.
    If a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed,
    another time zero may be more convenient.

An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined “time zero”.

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.svg "Overview of PET recording data")

> Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,

Reviewer 5: From Mattia Veronese: What about the injected dose? Is by definition decay corrected for injection time or by “time zero”. I know because I experience a case when the PET data were corrected by scan start and injected dose was corrected by injection time.  When we calculated the SUV the values were all over the place.

and defined on a common time scale.
Note, “time zero” can either be defined as time of injection or scan start,
and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.
In this example, tracer injection coincides with scan start.

## PET recording data

Template:

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    pet/
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_task-<label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json
```

PET data belong in the `pet` directory.
PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D (or 3D, if only one volume was acquired)
NIfTI files with the `_pet` suffix.
Volumes MUST be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

The OPTIONAL [`task-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#task) is used to
indicate a task subjects were asked to perform in the scanner.
Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions.

The [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) entity is used to

> indicate the tracer used.

Reviewer 5: Maybe `tracer` would be a better and more understandable word to use?

> indicate the tracer used.

Reviewer 2: That would involve adding a new entity, which I would recommend against unless you can help it.

> indicate the tracer used.

Author: I agree `ce` is not a good acronym and might be confusing for PET people, so I would vote for sticking with `acq`.

> indicate the tracer used.

Reviewer 2: That's fair. @mnoergaard's idea of a new entity (`tracer`) may be the best solution in the long run, but I think it would be best to implement that in 2.0 rather than add a new entity to 1.6. We have a separate repository for 2.0 proposals where I can open an issue about this.

> indicate the tracer used.

Author: Hi @tsalo , does this though mean that we should stick with `acq` for now? Do we agree on this?

> indicate the tracer used.

Reviewer 10: Hi all, I had a chat with M. Veronese about the `acq` vs `tracer` label and we both agree that, in our view, there is no difference in sticking with the one or adopting the other as long as it is unequivocal which tracer was used if there are multiple tracers.
If then the first version of the standard sticks with one and a future will use the other the adaptation of the older datasets would be fairly easy with any file system operation.
Hope this is somehow useful as we wanted to state our opinion "for the record".

> indicate the tracer used.

Author: Thank you!

> indicate the tracer used.

Reviewer 2: Based on the discussion in bids-standard/bids-2-devel#46, I support either approach. Since it sounds like the team can converged on `acq`, I'll resolve this discussion thread. Thanks for your patience!

This entity is OPTIONAL if only one tracer is used in the study,
but REQUIRED to distinguish between tracers if multiple are used.
The label used is arbitrary and each file requires a separate JSON sidecar
with details of the tracer used (see below).
Examples are `acq-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose or `acq-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B.
Other labels are permitted, as long as they are consistent across subjects and sessions
and consist only of the legal label characters.

If more than one run of the same task and acquisition (tracer) are acquired during
the same session, the [`run-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#run) entity MUST be used:
`_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3`, and so on.
If only one run was acquired the `run-<index>` can be omitted.

> The OPTIONAL [`rec-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#rec) entity

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The OPTIONAL [`recon-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#rec) entity
```

is used to indicate the reconstruction method used for the image,
with four reserved values:

  - `acdyn`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of dynamic data;
  - `acstat`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of static data;
  - `nacdyn`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of dynamic data;
  - `nacstat`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of static data.

Further details regarding reconstruction are in the `_pet.json` file.
If multiple reconstructions of the data are made with the same type of reconstruction,
a number MAY be appended to the label,

> for example `recon-acdyn1` and `recon-acdyn2`.

Reviewer 5: This should be `recon`.

> for example `recon-acdyn1` and `recon-acdyn2`.

Reviewer 2: There is no `recon` entity. `rec` stands for reconstruction, though.

> for example `recon-acdyn1` and `recon-acdyn2`.

Author: Ok, here we need to stick to the established abbreviation and use rec.

this consists of meta information at the participant level and should hence
be part of the `participants.tsv` or `session.tsv` file in case of multiple measurements.

| **Key name**              | **Requirement level** | **Data type**                          | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Manufacturer              | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Scanner manufacturer (for example, "Siemens").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer: Tiny formatting detail

checked in other pages of the spec and it seems that in the key description tables, most "string" value examples are formatted as follow:

```
Scanner manufacturer (for example, `Siemens`).
```

and not like 

```
Scanner manufacturer (for example, "Siemens").
```

This is more of a soft rule. 

I can push a commit or open a PR for that if it helps.

Reviewer: Actually had a quick chat with the BIDS maintainers.

We sort of agree that there some good about the way the examples are written in this BEP and so the best way to write examples in tables would be the following:

```
Scanner manufacturer (for example, `"Siemens"`).
```

As this is currently not the case in pretty much the rest of the spec, I will open an issue to keep track of this.

> | Manufacturer              | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Scanner manufacturer (for example, "Siemens").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Manufacturer              | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Scanner manufacturer (for example, `"Siemens"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
```

> | ManufacturersModelName    | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | PET scanner model name (for example, "mMR Biograph").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| ManufacturersModelName    | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | PET scanner model name (for example, `"mMR Biograph"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
```

> | Unit                      | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Unit of the image file; please see BIDS main spec section 6. SI unit for radioactivity (Becquerel) should be used (for example, "Bq/mL"). Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0054, 1001 Units.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Unit                      | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Unit of the image file; please see BIDS main spec section 6. SI unit for radioactivity (Becquerel) should be used (for example, `"Bq/mL"`). Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0054, 1001 Units.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

> | TracerName                | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Name of the tracer compound used (for example, "CIMBI-36")                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| TracerName                | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Name of the tracer compound used (for example, `"CIMBI-36"`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
```

> | TracerRadionuclide        | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Radioisotope labelling tracer (for example, "C11").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| TracerRadionuclide        | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Radioisotope labelling tracer (for example, `"C11"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

| TracerSNOMED              | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | ID of the tracer compound from the SNOMED Ontology (subclass of Radioactive isotope).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| TracerMolecularWeight     | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]                             | Accurate molecular weight of the tracer used.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | TracerMolecularWeightUnit | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Unit of the molecular weights measurement (for example, "g/mol").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| TracerMolecularWeightUnit | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Unit of the molecular weights measurement (for example, `"g/mol"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
```

| PharmaceuticalName        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Name of pharmaceutical coadministered with tracer.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| PharmaceuticalDoseAmount  | RECOMMENDED           | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Dose amount of pharmaceutical coadministered with tracer.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

> | PharmaceuticalDoseUnit    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Unit format relating to pharmaceutical dose (for example, "mg" or "mg/kg").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PharmaceuticalDoseUnit    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Unit format relating to pharmaceutical dose (for example, `"mg"` or `"mg/kg"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | PharmaceuticalDoseRegimen | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Details of the pharmaceutical dose regimen. Either adequate description or short-code relating to regimen documented elsewhere (for example, "single oral bolus").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PharmaceuticalDoseRegimen | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Details of the pharmaceutical dose regimen. Either adequate description or short-code relating to regimen documented elsewhere (for example, `"single oral bolus"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
```

| PharmaceuticalDoseTime    | RECOMMENDED           | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Time of administration of pharmaceutical dose, relative to time zero (please see below). For an infusion, this should be a vector with two elements specifying the start and end of the infusion period. For more complex dose regimens, the regimen description should be complete enough to enable unambiguous interpretation of the DoseTime vector. Unit format of the specified pharmaceutical dose time should be seconds. |
| Anaesthesia               | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | Details of anaesthesia used, if any.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

#### Radiochemistry

This section is mandatory and contains information regarding the radioactive

> material used in the experiment.

Author: Hmm, so the problem is that PET scans can differ quite a lot. For some tracers you have some information, that is not available for others. That's why in general we require all information that's available, but that's not always possible for all tracers. So how should this else be handled?

| **Key name**                  | **Requirement level** | **Data type** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 5: For bolus-infusion studies, two injected radioactivities should be reported. Therefore, we should consider to make the datatype for InjectedRadioactivity the following: [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] with the bolus dose in the first position, and infusion in the second position (i.e. [bolus, infusion]). If either bolus or infusion, just a single number should be reported. The validator should be updated to require information about the infusion, if either a bolus-infusion or infusion scan is performed (i.e. ModeOfAdministration). Thoughts?  @mathesong @melanieganz

Reviewer 8: Good catch! Another alternative might be to specify that the InjectedRadioactivity field is for the *total* injected radioactivity, and then to define a second InfusionInjectedRadioactivity, which specifies how much of the injected radioactivity came in the infusion (i.e. we can calculate bolus = total - infusion) for the case of a bolus+infusion paradigm. This ensures stability of the data type: we don't need to vary between a numeric or an array depending on the details of the measurement.

Reviewer 5: I like this proposal. I will go ahead and suggest this change, including an additional item named InfusionStart to indicate the start time of the infusion.

> | InjectedRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the specified injected radioactivity (for example, "MBq").                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the specified injected radioactivity (for example, `"MBq"`).                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

> | InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **Note for an FDG acquisition this is not available and should be set to -1.** |

Reviewer: For this key and the following ones, given that the datatype is "string", wouldn't it be better to use "n/a" rather than "-1", to denote "not available".

I am afraid that having a numeric value will lead to some annoying troubles and confusion down the line otherwise.

> | InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **Note for an FDG acquisition this is not available and should be set to -1.** |

Reviewer 5: From Mattia Veronese: Why is FDG the only exception? Should we phrase it more general like “For those tracers in which specific activity or injected mass are not available (e.g. FDG) can be set to “-1”

```suggestion
| InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **For those tracers in which injected mass is not available (e.g. FDG) can be set to “n/a”** |
```

Author: Agreed.

> | InjectedMassUnit              | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the mass of compound injected (for example, "ug" or "umol"). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to "-1"**.                                                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| InjectedMassUnit              | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of the mass of compound injected (for example, `"ug"` or `"umol"`). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to `"n/a"`**.                                                                  |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Specific activity of compound injected. **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to -1**.                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Specific activity of compound injected. **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to `"n/a"`**.                                                                                                        |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of specified specific radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g"). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to "-1"**.                                                                       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Unit format of specified specific radioactivity (for example, `"Bq/g"`). **Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to `"n/a"`**.                                                                       |
```

> | ModeOfAdministration          | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Mode of administration of the injection (for example, "bolus" or "infusion").                                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ModeOfAdministration          | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | Mode of administration of the injection (for example, `"bolus"` or `"infusion"`).                                                                                                                                                                         |
```

| InjectedMassPerWeight         | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Injected mass per kilogram bodyweight.                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | InjectedMassPerWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit format of the injected mass per kilogram bodyweight (for example, "ug/kg").                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| InjectedMassPerWeightUnit     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit format of the injected mass per kilogram bodyweight (for example, `"ug/kg"`).                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | SpecificRadioactivityMeasTime | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which specific radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SpecificRadioactivityMeasTime | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which specific radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit `hh:mm:ss`.                                                                                                                                                        |
```

| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                      |

> | MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, `"Bq/g"`).                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit `hh:mm:ss`.                                                                                                                                                           |
```

| InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

> | InfusionSpeedUnit                 | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of infusion speed (for example, "mL/s"). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| InfusionSpeedUnit                 | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of infusion speed (for example, `"mL/s"`). 
```

| 

> | InjectedVolumeUnit            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the injected volume of the radiotracer (for example, "mL").                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| InjectedVolumeUnit            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the injected volume of the radiotracer (for example, `"mL"`).                                                                                                                                                                                   |
```

| Purity                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Purity of the radiolabeled compound (between 0 and 100%).                                                                                                                                                                                                |

#### Time

> This section is mandatory and contains timing information about the imaging experiment. We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization ([LINK](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is mandatory and contains timing information about the imaging experiment. We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units).
```

| **Key name**    | **Requirement level** | **Data type**            | **Description**                                                                                                                                                           |
| --------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer 5: From Mattia Veronese: Aren't the description of "TimeZero" and "ImageDecayCorrectionTime" in contradiction? If all the scan measurements are corrected to timezero, why should we include an offset?

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TimeZero        | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit `hh:mm:ss`. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |
```

| ScanStart       | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of scan with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                             |

> | InjectionStart  | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `timeZero`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| InjectionStart  | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `TimeZero`. |
```

Reviewer: I suspect this is a typo

| FrameTimesStart | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Start times for all frames relative to `TimeZero` in default unit seconds.                                                                                                |
| FrameDuration   | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Time duration of each frame in default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1242) converted to seconds.                                                      |
| ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]               | Date of scan in the default unit “yyyy:mm:dd”.                                                                                                                            |
| InjectionEnd    | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]               | Time of end of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                          |

#### Reconstruction

> This optional section includes information about the image reconstruction.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This section is mandatory and contains information about the image reconstruction.
```

| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame.                                                                                     |
| RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame.                                                                                     |
| SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame.                                                                                    |

#### Example (`*_pet.json`)

```JSON
{
	"Manufacturer": "Siemens",
	"ManufacturersModelName": "High-Resolution Research Tomograph (HRRT, CTI/Siemens)",
	"BodyPart": "Brain",
	"BodyWeight": 21,
	"BodyWeightUnit": "kg",
	"Unit": "Bq/mL",
	"TracerName": "CIMBI-36",
	"TracerRadionuclide": "C11",
	"TracerMolecularWeight": 380.28,
	"TracerMolecularWeightUnit": "g/mol",

> 	"TracerInjectionType": "bolus",

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
	
```

	"InjectedRadioactivity": 573,
	"InjectedRadioActivityUnit": "MBq",
	"InjectedMass": 0.62,
	"InjectedMassUnit": "ug",
	"SpecificRadioactivity": 929.6,
	"SpecificRadioactivityUnit": "MBq/ug",
	"ModeOfAdministration": "bolus",
	"MolarActivity": 353.51,
	"MolarActivityUnit": "GBq/umol",
	"MolarActivityMeasTime": "13:04:42",
	"TimeZero": "13:04:42",
	"ScanStart": 0,
	"InjectionStart": 0,
	"FrameTimesStart": [0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420, 480, 540, 660, 780, 900, 1020, 1140, 1260, 1380, 1500, 1800, 2100, 2400, 2700, 3000, 3300, 3600, 3900, 4200, 4500, 4800, 5100, 5400, 5700, 6000, 6300, 6600, 6900],
	"FrameDuration": [10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300],
	"AcquisitionMode": "list mode",
	"ImageDecayCorrected": true,
	"ImageDecayCorrectionTime": 0,
	"ReconMethodName": "3D-OSEM-PSF",
	"ReconMethodParameterLabels": ["subsets","iterations"],
	"ReconMethodParameterUnit": ["none","none"],
	"ReconMethodParameterValues": [16,10],

> 	"ReconFilterType": "none",

Reviewer 5: Adding ReconFilterSize according to the specification. Should we consider to make this conditional in the validator, so if "ReconFilterType" = "none", then "ReconFilterSize" is not required? 

```suggestion
	"ReconFilterType": "none",
	"ReconFilterSize": 0,
```

Reviewer 10: Hi @mnoergaard I agree that _ReconFilterSize_ should be conditional to the value of _ReconFilterType_. An alternative would be to explicitly say in the text that it MUST be 0 if _ReconFilterType_ is "none". I guess that whichever of the two works better in the validator could be used

 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.tsv
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.json

```

Blood data belongs in the /pet folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder
if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.
The blood data is often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,
or manually for discrete blood samples.
Therefore, the recording key (`recording-<label>`) has two reserved values:
`autosampler`,
for continuous blood data measurements;
and `manual`, for discrete blood data.
All blood measurements should be reported according to a single time-scale
in relation to time zero defined by the PET data (Figure 1).
All definitions used below are in accordance with Innis et al. 2007 ([doi:10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493)).

> ## Blood sidecar JSON (`*recording-(manual|autosampler)_blood.json`)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Blood sidecar JSON (`*_recording-(manual|autosampler)_blood.json`)
```

> If blood measurements were made a `*recording-<label>_blood.json` file is expected that contains

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If blood measurements were made a `*_recording-<label>_blood.json` file is expected that contains
```

### Time

If manual blood samples, for example, using a COBRA counter are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
If blood samples using an autosampler, for example, using an Allogg autosampler are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`.

| **Column name** | **Description**                                                              | **Units**                             |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| time            | Time in relation to `TimeZero` defined by the `*_pet.json`. (for example, 5) | Unit of time steps in seconds |

### Radioactivity in plasma

This section may be omitted if plasma measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled plasma data.

> If plasma measurements are available by manual sampling, they should be added to the `*_recording-blood_discrete.tsv`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If plasma measurements are available by manual sampling, they should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
```

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_discrete.json`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
```

> If plasma measurements are available by an autosampler, they should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.tsv`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If plasma measurements are available by an autosampler, they should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
```

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.json`.

Reviewer 2: Should this be `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv` and `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv` instead of `*_recording-blood_discrete.tsv` and `*_recording-blood_continuous.tsv`, respectively?

Reviewer 2: It looks like this is addressed with https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/633#discussion_r563800522 and other proposed edits, so I will resolve this.

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.json`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`.
```

| **Column name**      | **Description**         | **Units**                                         |
| -------------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |

> | plasma_radioactivity | Radioactivity in plasma | Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, "kBq/mL") |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| plasma_radioactivity | Radioactivity in plasma | Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, `"kBq/mL"`) |
```

### Metabolites

This section may be omitted if metabolite measurements were not made.
If metabolite measurements are available by manual sampling

> they should be added to the `*_recording-blood_discrete.tsv`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
they should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
```

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_discrete.json`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
```

> If metabolite measurements are available by an autosampler they should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.tsv`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If metabolite measurements are available by an autosampler they should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
```

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.json`.

Reviewer 2: Continuous is misspelled as "continous" here.

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-blood_continous.json`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`.
```

Hence, it may contain information regarding metabolite info, such as the following three column examples:

| **Column name**            | **Description**                                                                   | **Units**                                                   |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| metabolite_parent_fraction | Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                          | Unit of parent fraction (for example, "unitless")           |
| metabolite_polar_fraction  | Polar metabolite fraction of the radiotracer (0-1)                                | Unit of polar metabolite fraction (for example, "unitless") |

> | hplc_recovery_fractions    | HPLC recovery fractions (the fraction of activity that gets loaded onto the HPLC) | Unit of recovery fractions (for example, "unitless")        |

Reviewer 2: Please replace "unitless" with "arbitrary".

Reviewer 8: These units are not arbitrary though.  The units are cancelled out, so that they are a fraction, and hence unitless.

Reviewer 2: Something similar came up in the qMRI BEP as well. There are a number of data types in that BEP where the data are on a specific scale, but without any specific unit, such as percentages. We chose to use the term "arbitrary" for such situations (see #580). If you think that there's a meaningful distinction to be made between truly arbitrary units and fractions of elements with meaningful units, then I think it merits a separate issue since such a distinction will be broadly applicable across the specification. I believe that this will also require changes to the ["Units" section of "Common Principles"](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/latest/02-common-principles.html#units), where "arbitrary" is defined.

Author: @mathesong does the definition of arbitrary to mean unitless make sense to you after Taylor's explanation?

Reviewer 8: This is an interesting point.  I still feel like there's a meaningful difference between the use of arbitrary in, say, BOLD signal and here. Here, we have SI units in both the numerator and denominator, and they happen to cancel out. But there is nothing arbitrary about the units of either measurement or their ratio.

I looked through the Units section of the common principles, and didn't find a good definition of arbitrary there.  Am I just missing it?

I googled around a little bit about found [this](http://media.iupac.org/divisions/VII/VII.C.1/C-NPU_Uppsala_081023_25_minutes_confirmed.pdf) in item 19: these are minutes from IUPAC. They describe how they define "arbitrary units", where the measurements themselves are a property of, for example, the local laboratory in which the measurements are made.  To avoid ambiguity, they instead refer to them as "procedure defined units".

Importantly, I would argue that these parent fractions are *not* a property of a local laboratory, and not procedurally defined either.  They ought to be directly comparable between different laboratories.  Does this make sense?  Or does it come across like a trivial distinction?

Reviewer 8: @tsalo : Is it necessary to resolve the arbitrary vs unitless distinction for the broader BIDS specification now before the commenting period runs out for PET BIDS?

To summarise from my previous message (which was written in a bit of a hurry): there is a clear distinction drawn by IUPAC at least between quantities which are unitless (or "dimensionless" in [their terminology](https://goldbook.iupac.org/terms/view/D01742)) and arbitrary units (or "procedure defined units" in [their terminology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrary_unit)).  The parent fraction clearly conforms to the former definition, and does not conform to the latter.

So I think that unitless is more appropriate here.  But can this be left as is for PET without having to amend the broader BIDS specification (at least until the issue has been more broadly discussed?)

Reviewer 2: @mathesong sorry for the delay on this. Keeping track of individual threads in a PR of this size is... difficult.

>  Is it necessary to resolve the arbitrary vs unitless distinction for the broader BIDS specification now before the commenting period runs out for PET BIDS?

I think this can be resolved outside of the commenting period, but before the associated release. I would like to see a new issue specifically about the unit terminology, though, since it has a broad impact.

> But can this be left as is for PET without having to amend the broader BIDS specification (at least until the issue has been more broadly discussed?)

I'd prefer to use the same terminology across the specification. The other maintainers may have a different opinion on this though, and I wouldn't want to hold anything up if they don't agree. Pinging @bids-standard/maintainers.

Reviewer 8: @tsalo : O, I completely understand!  Just finding this little discussion thread is hard enough as it is! :).  Thanks so much for getting back to me, and for starting up the issue (https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/731).  I'll follow this up in there then.

### Radioactivity in whole blood

This section may be omitted if whole blood measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled whole blood data.
If whole blood measurements are available by manual sampling they should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
If whole blood measurements are available by an autosampler, they should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`.

| **Column name**           | **Description**                      | **Units**                                                                         |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | whole_blood_radioactivity | Radioactivity in whole blood samples | Unit of radioactivity measurements in whole blood samples (for example, "kBq/mL") |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| whole_blood_radioactivity | Radioactivity in whole blood samples | Unit of radioactivity measurements in whole blood samples (for example, `"kBq/mL"`) |
```

### Example (`*_recording-manual_blood.json`)

```JSON
{
	"PlasmaAvail": true,
	"WholeBloodAvail": true,
	"MetaboliteAvail": true,
	"MetaboliteMethod": "",
	"MetaboliteRecoveryCorrectionApplied": false,
	"DispersionCorrected": false,

>     "time": {

Reviewer 2: The indentation and newlines in this snippet appear to be incompatible with JSONs.

Author: We are working on fixing that.

    to a visit to the scanning site, and starts with a new injection.
    In situations where different data types are obtained over several visits
    (for example, FDG PET on one day followed by amyloid PET a couple days after)
    these scans may be grouped into the same session.
    In other datasets, a subject leaving the scanner and returning under the same
    injection may be considered separate sessions.

1.  **Run** - In PET, subjects may have to leave the scanner to use the bathroom.
    While leaving the scanner would interrupt an MR acquisition, in PET this
    disruption is more appropriately considered missing data during a run.

1.  **Time zero** - A reference point in time, to which all timestamps pertaining
    to a recording are relative.
    Time zero will most commonly be the time of injection of a radioisotope, or
    the time at which the first scan of an acquisition is begun.
    If a pharmacological within-scan challenge is performed,
    another time zero may be more convenient.

An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined "time zero".

> ![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.svg "Overview of PET recording data")

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")
```

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.

> Note, "time zero" can either be defined as time of injection or scan start,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note, "time zero" is often defined as time of injection or scan start, but if a pharmaceutical challenge is carried out during the scan, this timepoint may also be chosen as time zero. The injected dose, the PET data, and blood data should all be decay-corrected to time zero, but because the time of injection not always coincides with scan start, the PET data may not always be decay-corrected to the time of injection. If this is not the case, this may be indicated in the reconstruction section (`ImageDecayCorrected` and `ImageDecayCorrectionTime´). In the example in the figure, tracer injection coincides with scan start. 
```

PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D (or 3D, if only one volume was acquired)
NIfTI files with the `_pet` suffix.
Volumes MUST be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

The OPTIONAL [`task-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#task) is used to
indicate a task subjects were asked to perform in the scanner.
Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions.

The [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) entity is used to
indicate the tracer used.
This entity is OPTIONAL if only one tracer is used in the study,
but REQUIRED to distinguish between tracers if multiple are used.
The label used is arbitrary and each file requires a separate JSON sidecar
with details of the tracer used (see below).
Examples are `acq-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose or `acq-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B.
Other labels are permitted, as long as they are consistent across subjects and sessions
and consist only of the legal label characters.

If more than one run of the same task and acquisition (tracer) are acquired during
the same session, the [`run-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#run) entity MUST be used:

> `_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3`, and so on.

Reviewer 11: Is 0 padding recommended here to label the runs? in other modalities there could be tens/hundreds of runs, not sure here

```suggestion
`_run-01`, `_run-02`, `_run-03`, and so on.
```

Reviewer 4: The current non-padded version is consistent with the rest of the spec.

Reviewer 11: So the common thing is to have very few runs (<9)?

Reviewer 5: Yes. Usually just a single run, but few cases have more runs. I have never seen more than 3.

Reviewer 4: I hadn't thought of it that way, but yes, I don't know that I've seen many datasets with 10 or more runs of the same task in a session. Zero-paddidng is permitted, but is not specifically recommended.

My point was just that if we want to adjust the wording to use zero-padding, we should do it consistently across the spec, not just in PET because that's the current PR.

Reviewer 11: Ah! If there are just this few it makes sense :)

Reviewer 11: @effigies you are right, this recommendation is mainly for sessions, e.g. longitudinal studies: 
https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/06-longitudinal-and-multi-site-studies.html

Author: Ok, we will not zero pad then.

PET and MRI images may be aggregated in the same dataset.
When analyzing MRI and PET data together,
it is essential to specify whether MR images have been corrected for gradient non-linearities,
using the `NonLinearGradientCorrection` metadata field
(see [Sequence Specifics](./01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.md#sequence-specifics)),
which is REQUIRED for all MR data if PET data is also present in the dataset
(see also [PET-MRI correspondence](../99-appendices/13-cross-modality-correspondence.md#pet-mri-correspondence)).
In the case of studies using combined PET/fMRI,
subject-specific tasks may be carried out during the acquisition within the same session.
If the same task is recorded with both modalities,
the same [`task-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#task) entity SHOULD be used.
For further details, see
[Task (including resting state) imaging data](./01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.md#task-including-resting-state-imaging-data).

In addition to the imaging data (`*.nii`) a `_pet.json` sidecar file MUST be provided.
The included metadata are divided into sections described below.

### PET sidecar JSON (`*_pet.json`)

#### Information

> This section is mandatory and contains general information about the imaging experiment.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This section is REQUIRED and contains general information about the imaging experiment.
```

| PharmaceuticalDoseTime    | RECOMMENDED           | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Time of administration of pharmaceutical dose, relative to time zero (please see below). For an infusion, this should be a vector with two elements specifying the start and end of the infusion period. For more complex dose regimens, the regimen description should be complete enough to enable unambiguous interpretation of the DoseTime vector. Unit format of the specified pharmaceutical dose time should be seconds. |
| Anaesthesia               | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | Details of anaesthesia used, if any.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

#### Radiochemistry

> 

Reviewer 11: Watch out the visualization of this table, now it reads as text, a character or symbol might be missing

> This section is mandatory and contains information regarding the radioactive

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This section is REQUIRED and contains information regarding the radioactive
```

material used in the experiment.

| **Key name**                  | **Requirement level** | **Data type** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ - |

> | InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). For bolus-infusion experiments, this value should be the sum of all injected radioactivity originating from both bolus and infusion. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                                                  |
```

| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                                           |
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 5: Add InfusionStart and InfusionRadioactivity to accommodate bolus-infusion experiments.

```suggestion
| InfusionRadioactivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Amount of radioactivity infused into the patient. Units should be the same as `InjectedRadioactivityUnit`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| InfusionStart                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Time of start of infusion with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

Reviewer 8: I think it's worth being a little bit clearer about this to avoid potential confusion.  Just to be crystal clear that the infusion radioactivity is subsumed by the total injected radioactivity.

Perhaps an extra sentence here: "This value must be less than or equal to the total injected radioactivity (InjectedRadioactivity)."

And even, to be extra clear, an extra sentence under InjectedRadioactivity: "This value includes all injected radioactivity originating from both bolus and infusion."

Thoughts?  I've never actually worked with bolus+infusion data, so I don't know whether this would be obvious or not to people who do.

Reviewer 5: Usually the two measures are reported separately and not as a sum. That is why I originally was eluding to my previous suggestion to disentangle them and put them into an array. But I am a bit worried whether my suggestion will create more confusion regarding  e.g. injectionstart and injectionend, which I guess would also have to be an array in this case. This is currently the solution we have for within-scan challenges (see PharmaceuticalDoseAmount and PharmaceuticalDoseTime). 

But if we agree to keep your suggestion, I agree that the description should be made more clear. I will try to update it. @melanieganz

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InfusionRadioactivity                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Amount of radioactivity infused into the patient. This value must be less than or equal to the total injected radioactivity (`InjectedRadioactivity`). Units should be the same as `InjectedRadioactivityUnit`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| InfusionStart                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Time of start of infusion with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

| InfusionSpeedUnit             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of infusion speed (for example, "mL/s").                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

> | InjectedVolumeUnit            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Unit of the injected volume of the radiotracer (for example, "mL").                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| InjectedVolume            | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    | Injected volume of the radiotracer in the unit ´mL´.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
```

| Purity                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Purity of the radiolabeled compound (between 0 and 100%).                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

#### Time

> This section is mandatory and contains timing information about the imaging experiment. We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units).

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This section is REQUIRED and contains timing information about the imaging experiment. We refer to the common principles for the standards for describing dates and timestamps, including possibilities for anonymization (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units).
```

| ScanStart       | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of scan with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                             |
| InjectionStart  | REQUIRED              | [number][]               | Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `TimeZero`. |
| FrameTimesStart | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Start times for all frames relative to `TimeZero` in default unit seconds.                                                                                                |
| FrameDuration   | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | Time duration of each frame in default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1242) converted to seconds.                                                      |

> | ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]               | Date of scan in the default unit "yyyy:mm:dd".                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 3: The format of the `ScanDate` should be overhauled, IMHO `YYYY-MM-DD` would fit better, because it's closer to how we currently define datetimes

see also: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-validator/issues/1154#issuecomment-773876920

> | ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]               | Date of scan in the default unit "yyyy:mm:dd".                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]               | Date of scan in the default unit `"YYYY-MM-DD[Z]"`, with the Z indicator being optional for indicating UTC timezone (see the [units section](../02-common-principles.md#units)).                                                                                                                            |
```

| InjectionEnd    | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]               | Time of end of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                          |

#### Reconstruction

> This section is mandatory and contains information about the image reconstruction.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This section is REQUIRED and contains information about the image reconstruction.
```

| ReconMethodName                      | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Reconstruction method or algorithm (for example, `"3d-op-osem"`).                                               |
| ReconMethodParameterLabels           | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [strings][]               | Names of reconstruction parameters (for example, `["subsets", "iterations"]`)                                   |
| ReconMethodParameterUnit             | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [strings][]               | Unit of reconstruction parameters (for example, `["none", "none"]`).                                            |
| ReconMethodParameterValues           | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Values of reconstruction parameters (for example, `[21, 3]`)                                                    |
| ReconFilterType                      | REQUIRED              | [string][] or [array][] of [strings][] | Type of post-recon smoothing (for example, `["Shepp"]`)                                                         |

> | ReconFilterSize                      | REQUIRED              | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Kernel size of post-recon filter (FWHM).                                                                        |

Reviewer 11: Could you write an example? how do you express the kernel size?
I've seen the following in pet_example3:

        "ReconFilterType": ["Image filter were Shepp 0.5 (2.5 mm in FWHM)","the Z filter was all-pass 0.4 (2.0 mm in FWHM)"],
        "ReconFilterSize": [2.5, 2.0],

I was a bit surprised since I wasn't expecting that much text description inside the field ReconFilterType

Reviewer 5: This is example data to mimic Parsey et al. 2006 (http://jnm.snmjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/47/11/1796%5Cnhttp://jnm.snmjournals.org/cgi/content/full/47/11/1796). 

Here they state the following in the text: "The reconstruction filter and estimated image filter were Shepp 0.5 (2.5 mm in full width at half maximum), the Z filter was all-pass 0.4 (2.0 mm in full width at half maximum), and the zoom factor was 4.0, leading to a final image resolution of 5.1 mm in full width at half maximum at the center of the field of view (25).". 

I agree with your comment, that it is a fairly long text description, but not sure how to circumvent this to make it more clear. In another example dataset (https://www.dropbox.com/sh/2vw8daz1j661mvp/AAClJnc49e52wnvF6-YHUuWIa?dl=0), it is simply a Gaussian 3D filter.

Reviewer 11: Yes, these fields are not clear. 

- Could more than one filter be applied? Are they applied to different things?

- In the example3, there's some redundant information, e.g. "(2.5 mm in FWHM)" in ReconFilterType, when you also have it in ReconFilterSize.

- It's not clear if the ReconFilterSize is [2.5, 2.0], how would you differentiate if it's from two filters, or if its from just one, like in the example you send (AZ_visual_stimuli):

        "ReconFilterType": "Gaussian",
	"ReconFilterSize": [4,4,4],

- Also you could specify the units in the field (it seems to be mm)

Reviewer 5: Good point. 

1) Yes, more than one filter can be applied. However, usually only one filter is applied.
2) I agree there is redundant information in the example data set. I have updated the example data set.
3) I would argue, that in most cases a isotropic filter is applied, and hence each entry in the FilterSize should correspond to an entry in the FilterType. Therefore, the AZ_visual_stimuli should only have one entry (I have already made this update). I think this should be checked in the validator, that ReconFilterType and ReconFilterSize have the same number of entries. 
4) You are right. This should be specified. 

```suggestion
| ReconFilterSize                      | REQUIRED              | [number][] or [array][] of [numbers][] | Kernel size of post-recon filter (FWHM) in default units `mm`.                                                                        |
```

| AttenuationCorrection                | REQUIRED              | [string][]                             | Short description of the attenuation correction method used.                                                    |
| ReconMethodImplementationVersion     | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Identification for the software used, such as name and version.                                                 |
| AttenuationCorrectionMethodReference | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Reference paper for the attenuation correction method used.                                                     |
| ScaleFactor                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scale factor for each frame.                                                                                    |

> | ScatterFraction                      | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scatter fraction for each frame.                                                                                |

Reviewer 11: In percentage (as PlasmaFreeFraction) or just fraction value?

> | ScatterFraction                      | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scatter fraction for each frame.                                                                                |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| ScatterFraction                      | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Scatter fraction for each frame (Units: 0-100%).                                                                                |
```

| DecayCorrectionFactor                | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Decay correction factor for each frame.                                                                         |

> | PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame.                                                                                     |

Reviewer 11: Units or example?

> | PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame.                                                                                     |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. ´"Bq/mL"´).                                                                                     |
```

> | PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame.                                                                                     |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| PromptRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Prompt rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. ´"Bq/mL"´).                                                                                     |
```

> | RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame.                                                                                     |

Reviewer 11: Units or example?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. ´"Bq/mL"´).                                                                                     |
```

> | RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame.                                                                                     |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| RandomRate                           | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Random rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. ´"Bq/mL"´).                                                                                     |
```

> | SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 11: Units or example?

> | SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| SinglesRate                          | RECOMMENDED           | [array][] of [numbers][]               | Singles rate for each frame (same units as `Unit´, e.g. ´"Bq/mL"´).                                                                                    |
```

Reviewer 3: One Markdown hint for you @mnoergaard: For code formatting you MUST use backticks, not "forwardticks". 

Looking at your suggestion, you use:
```
`Unit´
```

Which renders as:
`Unit´

You want to use two backticks, like:
```
`Unit´
```

Which makes it renders as:
`Unit`

You can go back to your suggestions and click "edit" to remedy these things, see screenshot:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9084751/107789549-03987100-6d52-11eb-8798-61731f4fa5e7.png)

Reviewer 5: Thanks for pointing this out. I don't now why this has happened, as I usually use backticks - and I can't even reproduce the symbol (i.e. forwardticks) on my keyboard... Nevertheless, I have updated my previous suggestions :-)

#### Example (`*_pet.json`)

```JSON
{
	"Manufacturer": "Siemens",
	"ManufacturersModelName": "High-Resolution Research Tomograph (HRRT, CTI/Siemens)",
	"BodyPart": "Brain",

> 	"BodyWeight": 21,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: Included in #730.

> 	"BodyWeightUnit": "kg",

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 4: Included in #730.

	"AcquisitionMode": "list mode",
	"ImageDecayCorrected": true,
	"ImageDecayCorrectionTime": 0,
	"ReconMethodName": "3D-OSEM-PSF",
	"ReconMethodParameterLabels": ["subsets","iterations"],
	"ReconMethodParameterUnit": ["none","none"],
	"ReconMethodParameterValues": [16,10],
	"ReconFilterType": "none",
	"AttenuationCorrection": "[137Cs]transmission scan-based"
}
```

## Blood recording data

This section includes all data needed to perform blood analysis for PET data.
The section may be omitted completely if blood measurements of radioactivity were not made.

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.tsv
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>_blood.json

```

Blood data belongs in the `pet/` folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder

> if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.

Reviewer 4: Is the idea that multiple reconstructions would be in separate sessions? I'm having trouble imagining what a dataset where the blood data should be in a different directory from PET data would look like.

Reviewer 5: No, this is assumed to be within the same session. For example, if there are multiple reconstructions within the same session, the structure would be something like this:

sub-01/ses-01/rec-acdyn1/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn1_pet.nii.gz
sub-01/ses-01/rec-acdyn1/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn1_pet.json
sub-01/ses-01/rec-acdyn2/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn2_pet.nii.gz
sub-01/ses-01/rec-acdyn2/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn2_pet.json

If the blood data is not modified with a new reconstruction, it can be placed in the session folder. Of course, given that TimeZero is the same for both reconstructions. If TimeZero is changed between the recons, the blood data may also be modified accordingly, and then separate blood files are needed within each recon folder.

Reviewer 4: There's nothing in the spec currently that allows `rec-<label>/` subdirectories. I would expect this to be:

```
sub-01/ses-01/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn1_pet.nii.gz
sub-01/ses-01/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn1_pet.json
sub-01/ses-01/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn2_pet.nii.gz
sub-01/ses-01/pet/sub-01_ses-01_rec-acdyn2_pet.json
```

Then there would be no need to move the blood data out of the same directory.

Reviewer 5: You are right! and then the name would be e.g. sub-01_ses-01_recording-autosampler.* if the blood data applies to both reconstructions. I propose this change to the text:

```suggestion
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle), in cases with e.g. multiple PET reconstructions within the same session, given that TimeZero is the same across reconstructions. Otherwise blood data must be stored in separate files for each reconstruction. 
```

Reviewer 4: Suggestion made in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/730

| Haematocrit                         | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured haematocrit, meaning the volume of erythrocytes divided by the volume of whole blood.                                                                                                                                                                |
| BloodDensity                        | RECOMMENDED           | [number][]    | Measured blood density. Unit of blood density should be in g/mL.                                                                                                                                                                                              |

### Time

If manual blood samples, for example, using a COBRA counter are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
If blood samples using an autosampler, for example, using an Allogg autosampler are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`

> and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`.

Reviewer 4: From reading this, there's no difference between autosampler and manual in terms of format. Is there an example of autosampler that would make a distinction clearer?

Reviewer 5: I am not totally sure what you are after, but I have tried to update the text to make it more clear the distinction. 

```suggestion
If manual samples of radioactivity in blood were drawn and measured using e.g. a COBRA counter,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-manual_blood.json`.
Instead, if samples of radioactivity were measured automatically in the blood with e.g. an ABSS autosampler (Allogg Technology), then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*_recording-autosampler_blood.json`. 
```

Reviewer 4: So my question here is just what the point of drawing a strong distinction between manually and autosampled blood data is. I had assumed that with autosampled data, there would be a file-wide T0 offset and a sampling frequency, while manual had to have timestamps. If everything has timestamps, why even bother discussing the two modes, since the data is recorded the same in either case?

Reviewer 8: I can chime in on this one. Despite having time stamps, there can still be a small time offset between manual and automatic samples.  The automatic sampler has a pipe leading to it that the blood runs through, and it can take 20-30 seconds for the blood to reach the sampler (and even then, there's a dispersion effect of blood from its passage through the tube, which we try to correct for).

Another (I think more) important reason to distinguish between these two sets of data are that they come from two different sources.  The automatic samples come from the sampler, and the manual samples come from the chemists who record everything.  The blood from the manual samples is then also used to calculate plasma radioactivity, parent fraction etc. So there are a bunch of different measurements and values all tied to the same sampling timestamps, from the same manual blood samples, which are measured in different ways.

There was a suggestion to have them all together before, but the resulting table was extremely sparse because there are so many automatic samples and so few manual samples, where all the extra columns were tied to the manual samples. It was decided that this would likely result in issues with data entry, through blending data from the different sources, as well as making it much more difficult to look through the data due to all the NAs everywhere.

Reviewer 4: I'm not suggesting people combine their recordings unwisely. Presumably there will often be different metadata that apply to each method, fully justifying multiple files. The point is simply that there is no difference in the data type, just the contents and metadata. I will make suggestions in #730 that should help clarify further.

with a key-value pair: `_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3` etc. (only integers are allowed as run labels).
When there is only one scan of a given type the run key MAY be omitted.
An example of this would be two consecutive scans performed within the same session,
for example two short FDG scans right after each other.
It is our assumption that the `run-<label>` is used in PET for the cases
where the subject does not leave the scanner.
Otherwise, we refer to the `ses-<label>` definition.

In addition to the imaging data a `_pet.json` sidecar file needs to be provided.
The included metadata are divided into sections described below.

### PET sidecar JSON (`*_pet.json`)

#### Information

This section is mandatory and contains general information about the imaging experiment.
Some of the fields are marked OPTIONAL, for example anaesthesia; for those fields
the BIDS validator will not throw an error even if they are not present.
Note, although bodyweight is a recommended information in (Knudsen et al. 2020, JCBFM [1]),
this consists of meta information at the participant level and should hence
be part of the `participants.tsv` or `session.tsv` file in case of multiple measurements.

> | Field name                | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: Adding this as a reminder for later (as I think this might require some synchronization with the validator for the data type) but I suspect that tables should now have the following headings / format. 

Will let my fellow maintainers correct me if I am wrong.

| **Key name**    | **Requirement level** | **Data type** | **Description**     |
| -   | - | - | -    |
| example    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]    |  some text |

Author: yes, thanks @Remi-Gau maybe we can even get this done tomorrow afternoon before we meet.

Author: This has been corrected.

        "Units": "kBq/mL"
    },
    "metabolite_parent_fraction": {
        "Description": "Parent fraction of the radiotracer.",
        "Units": "arbitrary"
    },
    "metabolite_polar_fraction": {
        "Description": "Polar metabolite fraction of the radiotracer.",
        "Units": "arbitrary"
    },
    "metabolite_lipophilic_fraction": {
        "Description": "Lipophilic metabolite fraction of the radiotracer.",
        "Units": "arbitrary"
    }
}
```

![Figure 2](images/blood_discrete_tsv.png "Screenshot of the discrete blood tsv file.")

Figure 2: Caption of the corresponding `recording-blood_discrete.tsv` file.

### Example (`*_recording-blood_continuous.json`)

```JSON
{
"time": {
        "Description": "Time in relation to time zero defined by the _pet.json",
        "Units": "s"
    },
    "plasma_radioactivity": {
        "Description": "Radioactivity in plasma samples. Measured using Allogg autosampler.",
        "Units": "kBq/mL"
    }
}
```

# Appendix: Useful resources

This website is an extremely useful resource: http://www.turkupetcentre.net/petanalysis/quantification.html

An extensive resource for background knowledge on kinetic modeling

> can be found here: https://nru.dk/index.php/misc/category/3-pet-kinetic-course

Reviewer 3: I suggest to remove this sub paragraph --> the links to resource should be woven in with with the specification text where it's relevant. And if there is no such text in the specification, the recommended links could be placed in the intro to PET.

Author: This has been resolved and we have made a regular Appendix for PET.

# Positron Emission Tomography

> Support for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).
> Please cite the following paper when referring to this part of the standard in
> context of the academic literature:
> 
> > Knudsen GM, Ganz M, Appelhoff S, Boellaard R, Bormans G, Carson RE, Catana C,
> > Doudet D, Gee AD, Greve DN, Gunn RN, Halldin C, Herscovitch P, Huang H, Keller SH,
> > Lammertsma AA, Lanzenberger R, Liow JS, Lohith TG, Lubberink M, Lyoo CH, Mann JJ,
> > Matheson GJ, Nichols TE, Nørgaard M, Ogden T, Parsey R, Pike VW, Price J, Rizzo G,
> > Rosa-Neto P, Schain M, Scott PJH, Searle G, Slifstein M, Suhara T, Talbot PS,
> > Thomas A, Veronese M, Wong DF, Yaqub M, Zanderigo F, Zoghbi S, Innis RB.
> > Guidelines for Content and Format of PET Brain Data in Publications
> > and in Archives: A Consensus Paper.
> > Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 2020 Aug;40(8):1576-1585.
> > doi: [10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433)

Reviewer 3: We recently changed where the citations are listed --> they are now all together in the intro of the BIDS spec.

I suggest the following rewording here:

```suggestion
Support for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) was developed as a
[BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../01-introduction.md#citing-bids)
on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.
```

The following citation must be placed in this file: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/src/01-introduction.md#datatype-specific-publications

> > Knudsen GM, Ganz M, Appelhoff S, Boellaard R, Bormans G, Carson RE, Catana C,
> Doudet D, Gee AD, Greve DN, Gunn RN, Halldin C, Herscovitch P, Huang H, Keller SH,
> Lammertsma AA, Lanzenberger R, Liow JS, Lohith TG, Lubberink M, Lyoo CH, Mann JJ,
> Matheson GJ, Nichols TE, Nørgaard M, Ogden T, Parsey R, Pike VW, Price J, Rizzo G,
> Rosa-Neto P, Schain M, Scott PJH, Searle G, Slifstein M, Suhara T, Talbot PS,
> Thomas A, Veronese M, Wong DF, Yaqub M, Zanderigo F, Zoghbi S, Innis RB.
> Guidelines for Content and Format of PET Brain Data in Publications
> and in Archives: A Consensus Paper.
> Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 2020 Aug;40(8):1576-1585.
> doi: [10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433)

The following example PET datasets have been formatted using this specification
and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

> -   Single dynamic scan (pet, mri, blood):

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri, blood):
```

	[`pet_example1`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/dmjmaxfswatptpm/AACw31cTyChLA1kwM4Vhqueja?dl=0)

> -   Single dynamic scan (pet, mri):

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri):
```

	[`pet_example2`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i95a71rpq2unks7/AACby5XcYQp9vcwgx3cNXBhza?dl=0)

> -   Single dynamic scan (pet, blood):

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, blood):
```

	[`pet_example3`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i0c3iq50id4s0d3/AABSjaczHM1SQnMRvh3fc7fna?dl=0)

Further PET datasets are available from [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org).

## PET recording data

As specified above, this extension is relevant for brain PET imaging
and its associated data, such as blood data.
In addition, the extension is in accordance with the guidelines for reporting
and sharing brain PET data (Knudsen et al. 2020, [1]).

> If you want to share structural magnetic resonance (MR) images with your PET data,

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion

*Shared MRI data along with PET:*
To share structural magnetic resonance (MR) images with your PET data,
```

> please distribute them according to the original BIDS specification

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
please follow the original BIDS specification
```

within-scan challenge is performed).

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.
Note, “time zero” can either be defined as time of injection or scan start,
and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.
Furthermore, although in this example tracer injection coincides with scan start,
this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying
either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”.

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
      [ses-<session_label>/]
        pet/
        sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.nii[.gz]
        sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json
```

PET data belongs in the /pet folder. PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D
(or 3D if only one volume was acquired) NifTI files with `_pet` suffix.
Volumes should be stored in chronological order (the order they were acquired in).

> Multiple sessions (visits) are encoded by adding an extra layer of directories

Author: Hi @Remi-Gau, yes, we will refer to the common principles section, but we also want to be very clear here for PET researchers what constitutes a session and a run, since this is somewhat different in PET than in MRI. Does that make sense. Especially in PET we can take a person out of the scanner during a run and then put them in again (e.g. during a 90 minute scan if they need to use the bathroom) and call it the same run, which you just wouldn't do for MRI. Cheers, Mel

|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED. Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                                                  |
| InjectedRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED. Unit format of the specified injected radioactivity (for example, "MBq").                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> | InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED. Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. *Note this is not required for an FDG acquisition, since it is not available, and can be set to -1. |

Reviewer 12: I don't know how formal the BIDS specification is, but it seems to me that if you label something as `REQUIRED`, it *has* to be present. But if adding a note with some exclusions is fine. Otherwise, maybe this could be rephrased as
```suggestion
| InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED. Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. *Note for an FDG acquisition this is not available and should be set to -1. |
```

Reviewer 12: similar for entries below

Author: Dear @KrisThielemans, we completely agree and this is a great suggestion. We will accept this one and also change if for the other fields below. Kind regards, Mel

| Purity                        | RECOMMENDED. Purity of the radiolabeled compound (for example, 90).                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| PurityUnit                    | RECOMMENDED. Unit of the radiochemical purity (for example, "percent").                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

#### Time

This section is mandatory and contains timing information about the imaging experiment.

| Field name      | Definition                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Author: Thanks @KrisThielemans, we looked at the common principles and there it is actually not clear if a time zone should be given. So @effigies and @Remi-Gau is the time zone not given in order to not reveal the location/identity?

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer: Well the date section in common principles does allow to indicate UTC offsets.

```
Date time information MUST be expressed in the following format YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[.000000][Z] (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute, second, optional fractional seconds, and optional UTC time indicator). This is almost equivalent to the RFC3339 "date-time" format, with the exception that UTC indicator Z is optional and non-zero UTC offsets are not indicated. If Z is not indicated, time zone is always assumed to be the local time of the dataset viewer. No specific precision is required for fractional seconds, but the precision SHOULD be consistent across the dataset.
```

Also makes me realize that the time stamp format is already mentioned in the common principle so I am not sure it is necessary to repeat it here.

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Author: Hi @KrisThielemans, just to clarify so do you mean by this that we should not call it TimeZero? I am a bit unsure what you mean right above.

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer 12: I was wondering if BIDS needs a `DateTimeZero`. @Remi-Gau will be able to confirm I guess. (I can see why merging data and time in one keyword is good: what happens when the time zone "crosses" the date?)

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Author: Ah, got it. Yes, let's hear @Remi-Gau @effigies @sappelhoff and @tsalo regarding this.

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer: Hum...

I am not sure we should merge those 2 things.

I am realizing that the `scanDate` would fit better in a `scans.tsv´ unless there is a good reason not to have it there for PET.
https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#scans-file

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer 3: yes, `scans.tsv` could be used to add the acquisition time (time of the first sample of whatever recording the scan is) for each individual scan, what would be the benefit of this field over the "scans.tsv" files?

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Reviewer: Seeing this [comment](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/519/files#r512084391) in the BEP012 made me realize that instead of `TimeZero` we could potentially reuse `StartTime` that is already used for the `physio` part.

https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/06-physiological-and-other-continuous-recordings.html

It is defined as such in physio: 

> Start time in seconds in relation to the start of acquisition of the first data sample in the corresponding neural dataset (negative values are allowed).

So i am not sure that we can just reuse the same definition in this case. 

I like the idea of having fewer "keywords" that we can consistently reuse across the specs IF their definitions are "close enough". Otherwise it might be confusing for the users if the same words means entirely different things in PET and Physio for example. 

Plus it might lead to some headaches later on. 

So if anyone feels there is potential for some conflicts later on in trying to shoe horn those PET concepts into the terminology / namespace we already have in the specs, then it might be better to sitck with TimeZero.

> | TimeZero        | REQUIRED. Time zero to which all scan and/or blood measurements have been adjusted to, in the unit “hh:mm:ss”. This should be equal to `InjectionStart` or `ScanStart`.             |

Author: Dear @effigies @Remi-Gau @sappelhoff @tsalo  and @mnoergaard, this is also definitely something we need to talk about tomorrow.

All method specific information related to the measurements can be stated
in the field `description`.

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_blood.json
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.tsv
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.json

```

Blood data belongs in the /pet folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the inheritance principle (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder
if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.
The blood data is most often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,
or manually for discrete blood samples.
Therefore, the recording key (`recording-<label>`) has two reserved values:
`blood_continuous`,

> for continuous whole blood data measurements (2.2.5);

Reviewer: I am not sure what the "2.2.x" refer to in this section. Are they links to other headings in this document?

Author: Hi @Remi-Gau , well spotted, we will fix this. Thanks!

and `blood_discrete`, for discrete blood data, including
whole blood (2.2.5),
plasma (2.2.3),
parent fraction and
metabolite fractions (2.2.4).

> The actual blood radioactivity data will be stored in tabular `*.tsv` files
> with the `blood_continuous` and `blood_discrete` suffix (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#tabular-files).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The actual blood radioactivity data will be stored in [tabular `*.tsv` files](../02-common-principles.md#tabular-files)
with the `blood_continuous` and `blood_discrete` suffix.
```

they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| Field name  | Definition                                                         |
|:------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "plasma_radioactivity". |
| Description | REQUIRED. Radioactivity in plasma.                                 |
| Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of plasma radioactivity (for example, "kBq/mL")     |

### Metabolites

This section may be omitted if metabolite measurements were not made.
If metabolite measurements are available they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.
Hence, it may contain information regarding metabolite info, such as the following three column examples:

| Field name  | Definition                                                               |
|:------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "metabolite_parent_fraction". |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "metabolite_parent_fraction"). |
```
Minor edit

| Description | REQUIRED. Parent fraction of the radiotracer (0-1).                      |
| Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of parent fraction (for example, "unitless")              |

| Field name  | Definition                                                              |
|:------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "metabolite_polar_fraction". |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "metabolite_polar_fraction)". |
```
Minor edit

| Description | REQUIRED. HPLC recovery fractions (the fraction of activity that gets loaded onto the HPLC). |
| Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of recovery fractions (for example, "unitless")                               |

### Radioactivity in whole blood

This section may be omitted if whole blood measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled whole blood data.
If whole blood measurements are available by a discrete sampler, for example, using a COBRA counter,
they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.
If whole blood measurements are available by a continuous sampler, for example, using an Allogg autosampler,
they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| Field name  | Definition                                                                                  |
|:------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "whole_blood_radioactivity".                     |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "whole_blood_radioactivity)".                     |
```
Very minor edit, to check I manage to get things going

        "Description": "Time in relation to time zero defined by the _pet.json",
        "Units": "s"
    },
    "plasma_radioactivity": {
        "Description": "Radioactivity in plasma samples. Measured using Allogg autosampler.",
        "Units": "kBq/mL"
    }
}
```

# Appendix: Useful resources

This website is an extremely useful resource: http://www.turkupetcentre.net/petanalysis/quantification.html

An extensive resource for background knowledge on kinetic modeling
can be found here: https://nru.dk/index.php/misc/category/3-pet-kinetic-course

# References

[1] Knudsen, G. M., Ganz, M., Appelhoff, S., Boellaard, R., Bormans, G., Carson, R. E., … Innis, R.B. (2020). Guidelines for the content and format of PET brain data in publications and archives : A consensus paper. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433

[2] Nørgaard, M., Ganz, M., Svarer, C., Frokjaer, V. G., Greve, D. N., Strother, S. C., & Knudsen, G. M. (2019). Optimization of preprocessing strategies in Positron Emission Tomography (PET) neuroimaging: A [11C]DASB PET study. NeuroImage, 199(October 2019), 466–479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.05.055

> [3] Innis, R. B., Cunningham, V. J., Delforge, J., Fujita, M., Gjedde, A., Gunn, R. N., … Carson, R. (2007). Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of reversibly binding radioligands. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493

Reviewer 3: I suggest to not list this "references" section, and instead edit the in-text references to contain DOI links to the papers.

For example up there in the text this:

`(Knudsen et al. 2020, [1])`

would become this:

`(Knudsen et al. 2020, [doi:10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433))`

which is rendered like this:

> (Knudsen et al. 2020, [doi:10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433))

We may expand the BIDS specification to include such "reference" sections in the future (see the request here: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/403) --> but currently we do not have it that way (to my knowledge).

Author: Hi @sappelhoff, has this changed since then? So which way would you like us to do t?

Reviewer 3: My recommendation from Oct 21 still stands :-) there have been no changes to how we handle DOIs meanwhile.

> Guidelines for Content and Format of PET Brain Data in Publications
> and in Archives: A Consensus Paper.
> Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 2020 Aug;40(8):1576-1585.
> doi: [10.1177/0271678X20905433](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X20905433)

The following example PET datasets have been formatted using this specification
and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri, blood):
	[`pet_example1`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/dmjmaxfswatptpm/AACw31cTyChLA1kwM4Vhqueja?dl=0)
-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, mri):
	[`pet_example2`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i95a71rpq2unks7/AACby5XcYQp9vcwgx3cNXBhza?dl=0)
-   One subject single dynamic scan (pet, blood):
	[`pet_example3`](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/i0c3iq50id4s0d3/AABSjaczHM1SQnMRvh3fc7fna?dl=0)

Further PET datasets are available from [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org).

## PET recording data

As specified above, this extension is relevant for brain PET imaging
and its associated data, such as blood data.
In addition, the extension is in accordance with the guidelines for reporting
and sharing brain PET data (Knudsen et al. 2020, [1]).

> *Shared MRI data along with PET:*

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
**Shared MRI data along with PET:**
```

Sorry I meant bold, an put only one *

To share structural magnetic resonance (MR) images with your PET data,

> please follow the original BIDS specification

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
 follow the original BIDS specification
```

(https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable).

> Please pay specific attention to the format the MR images are in,
> such as if they have been unwarped in order to correct for gradient non-linearities.
> There is a specific field in the MRI BIDS (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html) called “NonlinearGradientCorrection”
> which indicates this.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Please pay specific attention to the format the MR images are in.
For example, if they have been unwarped to correct for gradient non-linearities, it should be indicated in a specific field of the MRI-BIDS .json file (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html) called “NonlinearGradientCorrection”.
```

Reviewer 11: "Please pay specific attention to the format the MR images are in."
Is this really a "format"? I'm not big expert in MRI but sounds like this word doesn't fit well

Author: Hi @effigies @Remi-Gau @tsalo @sappelhoff and @mnoergaard, can we discuss this tomorrow?

The reason for this is that the MRI needs to be corrected for nonlinear gradients
in order to fit the accompanying PET scans for co-registration [1, 2].

> In general, SI units must be used (we refer to https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/05-units.html) and we recommend to use the CMIXF style formatting for SI units, for example, "kBq/mL"

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
*Units*: In general, SI units must be used (we refer to https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/05-units.html) and we recommend to use the CMIXF style formatting for SI units, for example, "kBq/mL"
```

rather than "kilobecquerel per ml".
An overview of a common PET experiment (with blood data) can be seen in Figure 1,
defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined “time zero”
(which should be defined either to be scan start or injection time;
please note an exception to this definition is possible if a pharmacological
within-scan challenge is performed).

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.
Note, “time zero” can either be defined as time of injection or scan start,
and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.
Furthermore, although in this example tracer injection coincides with scan start,
this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying
either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”.

> Template:

Reviewer 11: I would start the section with this.
This is what people expect to see when they reach the section. The other notes and comments could go either before (out of the section) or after. But the template is the most important and should be found at the beginning (This is also how it is in other specs)

Author: I moved this now.

The extra session layer (at least one `ses-<label>` subfolder) should be added
for all subjects if at least one subject in the dataset has more than one session.
Skipping the session layer for only some subjects in the dataset is not allowed.
If a `ses-<label>` subfolder is included as part of the directory hierarchy,
then the same `ses-<label>` tag must also be included as part of the file names themselves.
In general, we assume that a new session with respect to PET starts with either a new injection
(probably most common case) or with the subject being taken out of the scanner
(same injection, but subject leaves the scanner and returns).
However, for example, if a subject has to leave the scanner room and
then be re-positioned on the scanner bed, for example, to use the bathroom,
the set of PET acquisitions will still be considered as a session and match
sessions acquired in other subjects.
Similarly, in situations where different data types are obtained over several
visits (for example, FDG PET on one day followed by amyloid PET a couple days after)
those can be grouped in one session.
Please see the difference with the `run-<label>` below.

> With respect to the `task-<label>`, data is arranged in a similar way as task-based

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
*Task:* With respect to the `task-<label>`, data is arranged in a similar way as task-based
```

and resting state BOLD fMRI data.
In case of studies using combined PET/fMRI, subject-specific tasks may be carried out
during the acquisition within the same session.
Therefore, it is possible to specify `task-<label>` in accordance with the fMRI data.
For more information please see https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#task-including-resting-state-imaging-data.

> In case of studies with multiple acquisitions per subject using different tracers,

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
*Acquisition:* In case of studies with multiple acquisitions per subject using different tracers,
```

the `acq-<label>` must be used to distinguish between different tracers.
Please keep in mind that the label used is arbitrary and each file requires
a separate JSON sidecar with details of the tracer used (see below).
Examples are `acq-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose, `acq-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B, etc.

> The reconstruction key (`rec-<label>`) has four reserved values:

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
*Reconstruction:* The reconstruction key (`rec-<label>`) has four reserved values:
```

> `acdyn`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of dynamic data;

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- `acdyn`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of dynamic data;
```

> `acstat`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of static data;

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- `acstat`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of static data;
```

> `nacdyn`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of dynamic data;

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- `nacdyn`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of dynamic data;
```

> and `nacstat`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of static data.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- `nacstat`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of static data.
```

In case of multiple reconstructions of the data with the same type,
we allow for using a number after the `<label>` in order to distinguish,
for example `rec-acdyn1` and `rec-acdyn2`.

The run entity is used if one scan type/contrast is repeated multiple times
within the same scan session/visit.
If several scans of the same modality are acquired they MUST be indexed
with a key-value pair: `_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3` etc. (only integers are allowed as run labels).
When there is only one scan of a given type the run key MAY be omitted.
An example of this would be two consecutive scans performed within the same session,
for example two short FDG scans right after each other.
It is our assumption that the `run-<label>` is used in PET for the cases
where the subject does not leave the scanner.
Otherwise, we refer to the `ses-<label>` definition.

In addition to the imaging data a `_pet.json` sidecar file needs to be provided.
The included metadata are divided into sections described below.

### PET sidecar JSON (`*_pet.json`)

#### Information

This section is mandatory and contains general information about the imaging experiment.

> Some of the fields are marked optional (MAY), for example anaesthesia; for those fields

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Some of the fields are marked optional (OPTIONAL), for example anaesthesia; for those fields
```

I think in the other specs this is called OPTIONAL?
@sappelhoff @effigies could you confirm?

Reviewer 3: OPTIONAL and MAY are used interchangeably, but for this case, I would do the following:

```suggestion
Some of the fields are marked OPTIONAL, for example anaesthesia; for those fields
```

Reviewer 11: Thanks @sappelhoff! I've seen MAY written inside text, but in the tables always OPTIONAL

Reviewer 11: Has this change been integrated? Or it will only show at the end? (sorry I'm not very familiar with the github reviewing process)

| Manufacturer              | REQUIRED. Scanner manufacturer (for example, "Siemens").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ManufacturersModelName    | REQUIRED. PET scanner model name (for example, "mMR Biograph").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

> | Unit                      | REQUIRED. Unit of the image file; please see BIDS main spec section 6. SI unit for radioactivity (Becquerel) should be used (for example, "Bq/mL"). Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0054, 1001 Units.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| Units                      | REQUIRED. Unit of the image file; please see BIDS main spec section 6. SI unit for radioactivity (Becquerel) should be used (for example, "Bq/mL"). Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0054, 1001 Units.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
```

I would say Unit**s** or PETUnits, usually it's allways plural

Author: Actually, I disagree. I think unit is used in signular and since we are talking about the SI unit Becquerel, it's also a single unit. Does that make sense?

| InstitutionAddress        | RECOMMENDED. The address of the institution in charge of the equipment that produced the composite instances. Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0008, 0081 InstitutionAddress.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| InstitutionDepartmentName | RECOMMENDED. The department in the institution in charge of the equipment that produced the composite instances. Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0008, 1040 Institutional Department Name.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

> | BodyPart                  | RECOMMENDED. Name of the organ / body region scanned.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 11: Should we have a list of body parts? Is there a standardized list somewhere? This seems like something we will also need at some other points, maybe we can predefine the options

Author: Very good point! @effigies @sappelhoff @Remi-Gau @tsalo another thing to discuss in our meeting tomorrow.

| TracerRadLex              | RECOMMENDED. ID of the tracer compound from the RadLex Ontology.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| TracerSNOMED              | RECOMMENDED. ID of the tracer compound from the SNOMED Ontology (subclass of Radioactive isotope).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> | TracerMolecularWeight     | RECOMMENDED. Accurate molecular weight of the tracer used.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 11: Include a reminder of the recommended units

Author: Hi, so molecular weight is in moles, but maybe this is too much chemistry knowledge that we assume. I will add thsi now as well.

| PharmaceuticalDoseRegimen | RECOMMENDED. Details of the pharmaceutical dose regimen. Either adequate description or short-code relating to regimen documented elsewhere (for example, "single oral bolus").                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| PharmaceuticalDoseTime    | RECOMMENDED. Time of administration of pharmaceutical dose, relative to time zero (please see below). For an infusion, this should be a vector with two elements specifying the start and end of the infusion period. For more complex dose regimens, the regimen description should be complete enough to enable unambiguous interpretation of the DoseTime vector. Unit format of the specified pharmaceutical dose time should be seconds. |

> | Anaesthesia               | MAY. Details of anaesthesia used, if any.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| Anaesthesia               | OPTIONAL. Details of anaesthesia used, if any.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

See my previous comment

|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| InjectedRadioactivity         | REQUIRED. Total amount of radioactivity injected into the patient (for example, 400). Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1074) Radionuclide Total Dose.                                                                                                                                  |
| InjectedRadioactivityUnit     | REQUIRED. Unit format of the specified injected radioactivity (for example, "MBq").                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> | InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED. Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. *Note for an FDG acquisition this is not available and should be set to -1. |

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
| InjectedMass                  | REQUIRED. Total mass of radiolabeled compound injected into subject (for example, 10). This can be derived as the ratio of the `InjectedRadioactivity` and `MolarRadioactivity`. **Note for an FDG acquisition this is not available and should be set to -1.** |
```

| MolarActivity                 | RECOMMENDED. Molar activity of compound injected. Corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1077) Radiopharmaceutical Specific Activity.                                                                                                                                                        |
| MolarActivityUnit             | RECOMMENDED. Unit of the specified molar radioactivity (for example, "Bq/g").                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| MolarActivityMeasTime         | RECOMMENDED. Time to which molar radioactivity measurement above applies in the default unit "hh:mm:ss".                                                                                                                                                                             |

> | InfusionSpeed                 | RECOMMENDED. If given, infusion speed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 11: Include a reminder of the recommended units

Author: I added it know up here that the units are always specified in the fields below.

| InfusionSpeedUnit             | RECOMMENDED. Unit of infusion speed (for example, "mL/s").                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

> | InjectedVolume                | RECOMMENDED. Injected volume of the radiotracer.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 11: Include a reminder of the recommended units

Author: same here.

| InjectionStart  | REQUIRED. Time of start of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1042) converted to seconds relative to `timeZero`. |
| FrameTimesStart | REQUIRED. Start times for all frames relative to `TimeZero` in default unit seconds.                                                                                                |
| FrameDuration   | REQUIRED. Time duration of each frame in default unit seconds. This corresponds to DICOM Tag (0018,1242) converted to seconds.                                                      |
| ScanDate        | RECOMMENDED. Date of scan in the default unit “yyyy:mm:dd”.                                                                                                                         |
| InjectionEnd    | RECOMMENDED. Time of end of injection with respect to `TimeZero` in the default unit seconds.                                                                                       |

#### Reconstruction

This optional section includes information about the image reconstruction.

> All reconstruction specific parameters that are not specified, but one wants to include, should go into the `ReconMethodParameterVal` field.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
If there are further parameters, that are not specified here, they should go into the `ReconMethodParameterVal` field. 
```

	"MolarActivityUnit": "GBq/umol",
	"MolarActivityMeasTime": "13:04:42",
	"TimeZero": "13:04:42",
	"ScanStart": 0,
	"InjectionStart": 0,
	"FrameTimesStart": [0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420, 480, 540, 660, 780, 900, 1020, 1140, 1260, 1380, 1500, 1800, 2100, 2400, 2700, 3000, 3300, 3600, 3900, 4200, 4500, 4800, 5100, 5400, 5700, 6000, 6300, 6600, 6900],
	"FrameDuration": [10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 120, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300],
	"AcquisitionMode": "list mode",
	"ImageDecayCorrected": true,
	"ImageDecayCorrectionTime": 0,
	"ReconMethodName": "3D-OSEM-PSF",
	"ReconMethodParameterLabels": ["subsets","iterations"],
	"ReconMethodParameterUnit": ["none","none"],
	"ReconMethodParameterValues": [16,10],
	"ReconFilterType": "none",
	"AttenuationCorrection": "[137Cs]transmission scan-based"
}
```

## Blood recording data

This section includes all data needed to perform blood analysis for PET data.
The section may be omitted completely if blood measurements of radioactivity were not made.

> If blood measurements were made a `*_blood.json` file is expected that contains

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
**`*_blood.json`:** If blood measurements were made a `*_blood.json` file is expected that contains
```

information about which blood data is available as well as some blood measurement details.
Furthermore, depending on the information given in the `*_blood.json` file
we expect `.tsv` files with corresponding .json files that contain the values
and information regarding plasma samples, metabolite fractions,
discrete blood samples and/or continuous blood samples from an autosampler.
All these measurements should be defined according to a single time-scale
in relation to time zero defined by the PET data (Figure 1).
Additionally, if blood and metabolite measurements were made
one should always report radioactivity in plasma and corresponding
parent fraction measurements, including fractions of radiometabolites.

> All definitions used below are in accordance with Innis et al. 2007 [3].

Reviewer 11: Remember citations references as @sappelhoff suggested

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
 	[ses-<session_label>/]
	pet/
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_blood.json
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.tsv
	sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_recording-<label>.json

```

Blood data belongs in the /pet folder along with the corresponding PET data.
However, the blood data also follows the [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) and may be moved to an upper level folder
if it does not change, for example, with multiple reconstructions.
The blood data is most often recorded using an autosampler for continuous blood samples,
or manually for discrete blood samples.
Therefore, the recording key (`recording-<label>`) has two reserved values:
`blood_continuous`,
for continuous whole blood data measurements (2.2.5);
and `blood_discrete`, for discrete blood data, including
whole blood (2.2.5),
plasma (2.2.3),
parent fraction and
metabolite fractions (2.2.4).

> The actual blood radioactivity data will be stored in [tabular `*.tsv` files](../02-common-principles.md#tabular-files)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion

**`*.tsv`:** The actual blood radioactivity data will be stored in [tabular `*.tsv` files](../02-common-principles.md#tabular-files)
```

with the `blood_continuous` and `blood_discrete` suffix.
The first column in the `*.tsv` file should be a time column (see 2.2.1),
defined in relation to time zero defined by the `_pet.json` file.
All other information relevant to the blood measurements are recommended,
and can be added as an additional column.
It is expected that all values are (if relevant) decay corrected to time zero.

> 

Reviewer 11: Add an example of TSV file

Author: I will add this in the text instead of as a figure.

| DiscreteBloodDensity                | RECOMMENDED. Measured blood density. Unit of blood density should be in g/mL.                                                                                                                                                     |

### Time

If discrete samples, for example, using a COBRA counter are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.
If continuous samples, for example, using an Allogg autosampler are available,
then time information as detailed below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| Field name  | Definition                                                                             |
|:------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "time".                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "time").                                     |
```
small typo

| Description | REQUIRED. Time in relation to `TimeZero` defined by the `*_pet.json`. (for example, 5) |
| Units       | REQUIRED. Unit of time steps (for example, "s")                                        |

### Radioactivity in plasma

This section may be omitted if plasma measurements of radioactivity were not made.
It contains information regarding sampled plasma data.
If plasma measurements are available by a discrete sampler, for example, using a COBRA counter,
they should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_discrete.json`.
If plasma measurements are available by a continuous sampler, for example, using an Allogg autosampler,
they should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.tsv`
and the values below should be added to the `*recording-blood_continous.json`.

| Field name  | Definition                                                         |
|:------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "plasma_radioactivity". |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ColumnName  | REQUIRED. Name of the column (for example, "plasma_radioactivity"). |
```
small typo

defined on a single time scale relative to a predefined “time zero”
(which should be defined either to be scan start or injection time;
please note an exception to this definition is possible if a pharmacological
within-scan challenge is performed).

![Figure 1](images/PET_scan_overview.png "Overview of PET recording data")

Figure 1: Overview of a common PET experiment, including blood measurements,
and defined on a common time scale.
Note, “time zero” can either be defined as time of injection or scan start,
and all the PET and blood data should be decay-corrected to this time point.
Furthermore, although in this example tracer injection coincides with scan start,
this is not always the case and hence we allow for the flexibility of specifying
either time of injection or scan start as “time zero”.

Template:

```Text
sub-<participant_label>/
      [ses-<session_label>/]
        pet/
        sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.nii[.gz]
        sub-<participant_label>[_ses-<session_label>][_task-<task_label>][_acq-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_pet.json
```

> PET data belongs in the /pet folder. PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
PET data belong to the `pet` directory. PET imaging data SHOULD be stored in 4D
```

> (or 3D if only one volume was acquired) NifTI files with `_pet` suffix.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
(or 3D if only one volume was acquired) NIfTI files with `_pet` suffix.
```

during the acquisition within the same session.
Therefore, it is possible to specify `task-<label>` in accordance with the fMRI data.
For more information please see https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#task-including-resting-state-imaging-data.

**Acquisition:** In case of studies with multiple acquisitions per subject using different tracers,
the `acq-<label>` must be used to distinguish between different tracers.
Please keep in mind that the label used is arbitrary and each file requires
a separate JSON sidecar with details of the tracer used (see below).
Examples are `acq-18FFDG` for fludeoxyglucose, `acq-11CPIB` for Pittsburgh compound B, etc.

**Reconstruction:** The reconstruction key (`rec-<label>`) has four reserved values:
- `acdyn`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of dynamic data;
- `acstat`, for reconstructions with attenuation correction of static data;
- `nacdyn`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of dynamic data;
- `nacstat`, for reconstructions without attenuation correction of static data.

> Further details regarding reconstruction are in the _pet.json file.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
Further details regarding reconstruction are in the `_pet.json` file.
```
